 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ghana National Cyber Security Policy & Strategy  
 
 
Final Draft    
 
 
 
 
 
July 23 2015 
Document Version 
Version  Date  Remark 
Ver. 1.0  March 2015  Final Draft handed over to Ministry of 
Communications 
Ver. 2.0  7 September 2015   Final version after Validation Workshop 
2 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
 Document Contact 
Table of Contents 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... 7 
a.  SECTION ONE: BACKGROUND ................................................................................................ 9 
I.  CHALLENGES, DEVELOPMENTS WITH FOCUS ON THE POLICY ............................... 10 
i.  Overview .............................................................................................................................. 10 
ii.  Global Activities on Cyber Security .................................................................................... 12 
iii.  Regional Initiatives .............................................................................................................. 13 
iv.  Local Initiatives ................................................................................................................ 14 
II. NEED FOR POLICY ................................................................................................................... 15 
III. RELEVANT PROVISION – ICT4AD ........................................................................................ 17 
b.  SECTION TWO: CYBER SECURITY POLICY ........................................................................ 18 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 19 
DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................. 19 
CNII SECTORS FOR GHANA ....................................................................................................... 20 
POLICY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................................ 22 
I.  POLICY STATEMENT ............................................................................................................ 24 
Legislative & Regulatory Framework ......................................................................................... 24 
Cyber Security Technology Framework .................................................................................... 24 
Culture of security and Capacity Building ................................................................................. 25 
Research & Development towards Self-Reliance .................................................................... 25 
Compliance and Enforcement .................................................................................................... 26 
Child Online Protection ............................................................................................................... 26 
3 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
 Cyber Security Emergency Readiness ..................................................................................... 26 
International Cooperation ........................................................................................................... 27 
c.  SECTION THREE: NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY ......................................... 28 
I.  STRATEGIC ACTIONS FOR POLICY THRUST ................................................................. 29 
i.  Strategy Implementation Timelines ................................................................................... 35 
ii.  Specific Initiatives ................................................................................................................ 36 
APPENDIX .......................................................................................................................................... 37 
National Cyber Security Policy Working Group ........................................................................ 38 
National Cyber Security Awareness Program .......................................................................... 42 
National Cyber Security Center (NCSC) ................................................................................... 46 
National Cyber Security Council (NCSCC) ............................................................................... 50 
National Cyber Security Crisis Management Plan (NCSCMP) ............................................... 53 
National Computer Security Incidence Response Team (National CSIRT)........................... 56 
 
4 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
     
GGGGLLLLOOOOSSSSSSSSAAAARRRRYYYY    
AU        Africa Union 
CCI        Commonwealth Cyber Initiative 
CERT       Computer Emergency Response Team 
CSIR        Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
CSIRT       Computer Security Incidence Response Team 
CNII        Critical National Information Infrastructure 
CID        Criminal Investigation Department 
COP                                        Child Online Protection    
EOCO    Economic and Organized Crime Office 
ETA        Electronic Transactions Act 
FIRST                       Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams    
GARNET      Ghanaian Academic and Research Network 
ICT4AD   Information and Communication Technology for Accelerated 
Development  
ITU  International telecommunications Union 
IMPACT      Multilateral Partnership against Cyber Threat 
ISOC/IEC  International Organization for Standardization / International 
Electrotechnical Commission
  
LI        Legislative Instrument 
5 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
 MDA        Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
NCA        National Communications Authority 
NITA         National Information Technology Agency 
NitaCERT       NITA Computer Emergency Response Team 
NCSAW      National Cyber Security Awareness Program 
NCSC       National Cyber Security Center 
NCSCC      National Cyber Security Council 
NCSPWG      National Cyber Security Working Group 
NCSCMP      National Cyber Security Crisis Management Plan 
PKI        Public Key Infrastructure 
R& D        Research and Development 
SIM        Subscriber Identification Module 
UNECA                   United Nations Economic Commission for Africa    
WG         Working Group 
6 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
     EEEEXXXXEEEECCCCUUUUTTTTIIIIVVVVEEEE    SSSSUUUUMMMMMMMMAAAARRRRYYYY    
 
The expansion of Internet access in Africa, representing the largest growth in the world, means 
more people today have access to Internet, with its attendant risks of attack from people with 
disruptive tendencies to defraud other Internet users and commit cybercrimes.  These disruptive 
activities by cyber criminals has caused the debate on cyber security to be on the top of the 
agenda for almost every country, and many countries are strategizing on how to combat the 
cyber criminals. Several global initiatives are also addressing cyber crime and enhancement of 
cyber security. The ITU’s IMPACT program is providing several member countries early warning 
on  cyber  crimes  and  is  helping  these  member  countries  secure  their  cyber  space.  The 
Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (CCI) is another initiative that seeks to help commonwealth 
countries adopt efficient cyber security policies and Infrastructure.   
At the continental level, the African (AU) has developed a cyber security convention which was 
ratified by African Presidents.  
The cyber menace in Ghana has been more of cyber fraud. The popular “sakawa” where cyber 
criminals defraud unsuspecting Internet users of large sums of money in Ghana and abroad 
remains prevalent because of inadequate laws on cyber crime to prosecute cyber criminals.  
The Electronic Transaction Act (2008) has provisions for law enforcement agencies to fight 
cyber crime. However, this is not adequate for law enforcement in the fight against cyber crime 
as there are legal gaps caused by rapidly change in the cyber landscape.   There is, however, 
the need to fully address all aspects of cyber security, and apply a multi-stakeholder approach 
to fighting the cyber menace.  Several initiatives are on-going to address the cyber menace, all 
of which need to be brought under one umbrella for Ghana. 
The Ministry of Communications, Ghana with the support of UN Economic Commission for 
Africa  (UNECA)  began  a  process  in  2011  to  review  some  aspects  of  Ghana’s  ICT  for 
Accelerated  Development  (ICT4AD)  policy  to  identify  gaps  as  a  result  the  changing  ICT 
7 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
 landscape and recent developments in ICTs that were not originally envisaged and put in the 
document. Cyber security is one of the four thematic areas under this review and   the national 
cyber security policy and strategy for Ghana has been developed. The policy has nine policy 
pillars and includes effective governance, legal framework, technology framework, response 
readiness and international cooperation. 
Five special initiatives have been included in the first five year strategic plan. These initiatives 
includes establishment of institutional frameworks, creating awareness, ensuring coordination of 
cyber  security  initiatives  and  enforcement  of  cyber  standards  in  Ghana.  When  fully 
implemented, Ghana will have a solid cyber security base framework to address its cyber 
needs. 
8 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
  
 
    
    
    
a. SECTION ONE: BACKGROUND 
9 | Page    N ationa l Cybe r Securi ty  Poli cy  & Strategy 
     
IIII....  CCCCHHHHAAAALLLLLLLLEEEENNNNGGGGEEEESSSS,,,,    DDDDEEEEVVVVEEEELLLLOOOOPPPPMMMMEEEENNNNTTTTSSSS    WWWWIIIITTTTHHHH    FFFFOOOOCCCCUUUUSSSS    OOOONNNN    TTTTHHHHEEEE    PPPPOOOOLLLLIIIICCCCYYYY    
iiii....  OOOOvvvveeeerrrrvvvviiiieeeewwww    
 
In recent times, Ghana has experienced a number of cyber attacks including defacing of 
a number of government websites by Internet hackers. These attacks have a denting 
effect on the cyber image of Ghana and are indications of security weakness of our 
cyber infrastructure and space. Cyber attacks have become very sophisticated and 
widespread  and  many  countries  are  not  only  focusing  on  protecting  their  critical 
information infrastructure but also ensuring that there are very good incidence responds 
teams in place to respond to incidents cyber security incidents. 
 
Since the turn of the century, we have seen a rapid growth of the Internet in Ghana. The 
growth has brought in its wake extensive cyber activities and subsequently attacks on 
various information infrastructure as well as cyber fraud popularly known as “Sakawa”.  
The biggest challenge is that the designated central point in the country where victims 
of “Sakawa” can report to at the Police CID Cybercrime Unit is not visible nationally and 
is under resourced. In cases when these incidences had been reported, it has taken 
many years to apprehend any suspect because of the lack of expertise in tracking these 
criminals using computers–based forensic skills.  To make matters worse, when such 
cyber criminals were apprehended and processed to court, there are, more often, not 
enough legal basis to prosecute these criminal, as the legal system is inadequate to 
convict and punish cyber criminals.  Consequently, Ghana’s image continues dwindle in 
cyberspace and is therefore considered as a cyber crime prone country. 
For many years, cyber cafes have been the main source of Internet access, as many 
people could not afford the high cost of personal computers and Internet access and, as 
10 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 a result of lack of operational guideline, cyber cafes have become fertile ground for 
cyber crime.  
 
Ghana’s mobile penetration stood at 115.64% as at the end of March 2015. The high 
mobile penetration has brought about an increase in mobile phone threats and fraud. 
The increased use of smart phones, especially with the introduction of M-commerce, is 
likely to bring more incidents like hackings and other attacks to mobile phone users. 
There is therefore a need to create awareness of risk of cyber attacks and exploitations 
for mobile users. As a result of mobile fraud,  the National Communications Authority 
registered all SIM card in Ghana but there still remain high crime in the mobile space as 
cyber criminal continue to engage SIM Box fraud and other fraudulent activities. 
 
Until recently,  Ghana’s Internet  backbone  and  resources  have  been largely  private 
sector driven. This result has been that many government officials send and receiving 
highly  sensitive  government information  using  free  email  services  such  Yahoo  and 
Google  making  it  vulnerable  to  information  theft.  However,  since  2008,  with  the 
establishment of the National Information Technology Agency (NITA), Ghana embarked 
on a massive government network rollout to ensure efficiency in government operations 
and improved service delivery to citizens. . The result is that NITA now has Internet and 
Data services to all Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and has  national 
datacenter facilities that enable NITA provide email and webhosting services under 
government designated second level domain (.gov.gh) NITA is also implementing the 
Public  Key  Infrastructure  (PKI)  and  Digital  Certificates  to  enhance  secure 
communication  within  government.  There  is  the  need  of  a  strong  public  private 
partnership in crafting our national cyber security policy to take care of the interests of 
the private and public sectors. 
 
11 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 iiiiiiii....  GGGGlllloooobbbbaaaallll    AAAAccccttttiiiivvvviiiittttiiiieeeessss    oooonnnn    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    
Cyber Security is central to the Information and knowledge economy. Countries which 
have  high  levels  of  networked  computers  and  automation  stand  greater  risks  than 
countries with less developed networked computer infrastructure. As many countries 
with less developed network infrastructure strive to become a knowledge society, many 
network infrastructures will be rolled out with automation. This is evidenced in many 
African countries where over the last few years, massive submarine fiber optic cable 
Internet  transit  have  landed  on  the  shores  and    massive  in-country  fiber  optic 
backbones are being rolled out. An increase in network computer infrastructure will 
bring a proportionate risk to critical information infrastructure.   
For many years, many countries with high degree of networked computer infrastructure 
have been working around securing their critical information infrastructure and have 
developed  cyber  security  policies  and  strategies  to  mitigate  cyber  incidences  and 
crimes.  
 No one country control cyber space and everyone from anywhere in the world can 
access information from the Internet. It is therefore very important that countries put in 
place robust security around critical national information infrastructure and set up very 
swift response systems as risk of attacks cannot be eliminated. Additionally using   an 
international approach of cooperation to secure cyber space and mitigate cyber crimes 
is also essential. 
Many  countries  with  high  networked  computer  infrastructure  and  global  companies   
already have Computer Security Incidents Response Teams (CSIRTs) in place where 
responses  to  cyber  incidences  are  coordinated  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  cyber 
incidences. However in developing economies, very few CSIRTs have  been setup, 
12 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 although it is top of the agenda for many of these countries as networked computer 
infrastructure expands. 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) through the International Multilateral 
Partnership against Cyber Threat (IMPACT) program has over the last few years played 
a leadership role is providing early warning systems and training cyber security experts 
around the world. Today, IMPACT has over 152 countries members. ITU has indeed 
developed a framework for developing countries to help them kick start a process of 
developing policies and strategy around cyber security. 
Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST Inc.) is a global forum of 
Computer Security Incidents Response Teams (CSIRTs). Membership to FIRST is by 
recommendation and through a rigorous standards process. 
The Budapest Convention on Cyber Security which has been in force since 2004 was 
elaborated by the Council of Europe with the participation of Canada, Japan, South 
Africa and the USA. The Convention is open to any country which wants to participate. 
The convention is used as a guideline, reference standard or model law in more than 
100 countries.  
iiiiiiiiiiii....  RRRReeeeggggiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
Governments in Africa today have moved the ICT discussion from infrastructure to 
cyber security. A decade ago, infrastructure was a major challenge to many African 
countries. Many countries have invested in massive in-country infrastructure and the 
connectivity and access challenge is waning. The networked computer infrastructure 
coming up in many African countries has opened up cyber space to many more citizens 
and accompanying this, the risk of using the Internet. A few countries like Tunisia, South 
Africa and Kenya already have a CERT in place. Many countries are also in the process 
13 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 of developing cyber security policy and strategy (including formation of CERTs). In order 
to harmonize the development of cyber security policy and strategy, the Africa Union 
(AU) and the UN Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) have developed a cyber 
security and cybercrime convention and has been ratified by African heads of States. 
Ratification of the convention, it can be argued, will foster regional cooperation in the 
fight against cyber crime. 
In 2010, AfricaCERT was formed and have been undertaking capacity building program 
annually in different Africa countries on the establishment and management of CSIRTs 
for African countries. 
iiiivvvv.... LLLLooooccccaaaallll    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss        
Today’s society thrives virtually on using the Internet for communication and business. 
As networked computer infrastructure expands in the country, there is an increasing 
threat to business and communication.    
Recent several cyber attacks on government websites in Ghana is a wake-up call for 
the  development  of  a  cyber  security  policy  and  strategy.  Resolutions  of  cyber 
incidences  have  been  uncoordinated  and  in  many  cases,  there  were  no  reporting 
structure put in place to guide in dealing with future attacks.  
 
The National Information Technology Agency (NITA)’s concern of ensuring security of 
the  government  network  initiated  discussion  amongst  stakeholder  in  the  Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to setup a NITA Computer Emergency Response 
team  (nitaCERT)  to  coordinate  cyber  incidences  and  assist  in  resolving  future 
incidences within the government network. 
14 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
The Ministry of Communication initiated the  national Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT) project in 2013 in collaboration with the ITU-IMPACT. The national CERT 
was established in August 2014 is fully operational handling incidents and sending out 
early  warning  to  its  constituents.  The  National  Security  Council  and  many  other 
institutions such as Ghanaian Academic and Research Network (GARNET) in academia 
are working on different projects towards securing cyberspace.   
 
The SIM registration by NCA is another initiative to mitigate cyber crimes committed 
using mobile phones. The Ghana Police Service has also put in place the cybercrime 
Unit to alleviate cyber and other related crimes. The Economic and Organized Crime 
Office  (EOCO)  under the Attorney  General’s  Department  and  Financial  Intelligence 
Center for the financial sector are all government initiatives geared towards mitigating 
crime in general and computer crime in particular. 
 
On the business side, the opening of an e-Crime Bureau in Ghana has greatly helped 
organizations investigate cyber crime thoroughly and improve protection of cyber space.  
 
In spite all these initiatives, the fact still remains that there is a general lack of education 
on cyber security amongst the consuming public of ICT products and services which 
needs to be addressed. 
    
IIIIIIII....    NNNNEEEEEEEEDDDD    FFFFOOOORRRR    PPPPOOOOLLLLIIIICCCCYYYY    
As  Ghana  strives  to  become  an  information  and  knowledge  economy,  there  is  an 
increased emphasis on informational activities and the information industry.  Businesses 
will compete on information and computer systems will work efficiently on the right 
15 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 information to produce the output required. It is becoming extremely necessary for 
nations to protect critical national information infrastructure to ensure national security in 
the wake of recent cyber wars, and ensure a safe cyber space to enable wealth creation 
for citizens. As networked computer infrastructure increases, there will be an increase in 
attacks on critical information infrastructure that is required to sustain the economy of 
the information and knowledge society. There is therefore an increasing need to protect 
critical national information infrastructure (CNII) and create a robust incidence response 
system when any attack is made on the CNII, to avoid loss of revenue due to down time 
and ensure national security. 
 
The need to create a security culture by creating awareness of the enormous threats 
that users, especially children, of the Internet are exposed to must be addressed by a 
national cyber security policy.  Awareness creation (education) of the risks users of the 
Internet  are exposed and the vulnerabilities on our phones, computers and PDAs to 
can drastically reduce cyber incidences with its consequential loss of revenue when 
business are involved. This will create a very conducive environment in the information 
economy where Ghanaians can create wealth in peace without fear of harassment by 
cyber criminal and fraudsters.  
 
Government business can be brought to a halt if the NITA infrastructure is attacked. In 
the same way, many businesses may grind to a halt if the infrastructure of ISPs and 
other public Internet and phone services are attacked.  There is therefore the need to 
develop  technical  capacity  of  local  technocrats  to  enable  them  manage  the  cyber 
security risks to government and private sector critical information infrastructure.  In 
order to share knowledge on incidence response and ensure that there is a uniform risk 
management of all critical information infrastructures (both public and private), the policy 
16 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 must address the need for a central coordinating body and work with a public private 
partnership model. 
 
III. RELEVANT PROVISION – ICT4AD 
Pillar  14  of  the  ICT4AD  policy  relates  to  Security  Agencies  using  ICT  to  combat 
cybercrime.  The  pillar  among  other  things  places  emphasis  on  capacity  building, 
international  cooperation  and  building  infrastructure  for  security  agencies  to  enable 
them use ICT to combat crime.  Additionally, the pillar is to ensure that the legal text of 
the policy is up to date to help law enforcement agencies prosecute any cyber crime 
offenders. 
The Electronic Transaction Act (ETA) 2008 has specific legislation on cyber crime and 
prescribes punishment for cyber crime perpetuators. The Act addresses issues on the 
fight against cyber crime.  
The Data Protection Act which has been passed by the Parliament of Ghana ensures 
protection of private data of government, citizens and businesses in Ghana. 
The Pillar 14 and the ETA fail to capture a holistic approach to securing the cyber space 
as a means of mitigating cyber incidences that may affect the ability of citizens to create 
wealth.  
The several on-going initiatives which are not coordinated makes it impossible to know 
what different agencies of Government, academia and business are doing to enhance 
cyber  security.  A  National  Cyber  Security  framework  covering  policy  and 
implementation strategy done holistically will ensure coordination and greatly enhance 
the national cyber security of Ghana.  
17 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. SECTION TWO: CYBER SECURITY POLICY  
18 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
     
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
Ghana’s determination to secure its cyber space is driven by a desire to ensure that our 
people are free from cyber attacks with devastating effects. This is informed by the fact 
that a people with a culture of cyber security achieved through awareness creation and 
capacity building are in a better position to handle cyber attacks as and when they 
occur. Our ability to identify and understand threats and how they can be handled 
reduces  the  number  of  actual  attacks  significantly  and  enhances  the  continuous 
operation of the national infrastructure on which critical information are held in the 
interest and security of the nation. We also recognize that the threat is not restricted 
only to government but also to operators who provide public services to citizens and 
private networks, thus the need for private public partnership.  
 
DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this policy document, 
CCCCrrrriiiittttiiiiccccaaaallll    NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    IIIInnnnffffoooorrrrmmmmaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    IIIInnnnffffrrrraaaassssttttrrrruuuuccccttttuuuurrrreeee    ((((CCCCNNNNIIIIIIII)))) may be defined as those assets (real 
and virtual), systems and functions that are vital to the nations that their incapacity or 
destruction would have a devastating impact on: 
•  NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    eeeeccccoooonnnnoooommmmiiiicccc    ssssttttrrrreeeennnnggggtttthhhh    
Confidence that the nation's key growth area can successfully compete in global 
market while maintaining favorable standards of living. 
  
19 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 •  NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    iiiimmmmaaaaggggeeee 
Projection of national image towards enhancing stature and sphere of influence.  
  
•  NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    ddddeeeeffffeeeennnnsssseeee    aaaannnndddd    sssseeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy 
Guarantee sovereignty and independence whilst maintaining internal security.  
  
•  GGGGoooovvvveeeerrrrnnnnmmmmeeeennnntttt    ccccaaaappppaaaabbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    ttttoooo    ffffuuuunnnnccccttttiiiioooonnnnssss 
Maintain order to perform and deliver minimum essential public services.  
  
•  PPPPuuuubbbblllliiiicccc    hhhheeeeaaaalllltttthhhh    aaaannnndddd    ssssaaaaffffeeeettttyyyy 
Delivering and managing optimal health care to the citizen. 
 
CNII SECTORS FOR GHANA 
 Countries identify the CNII based on the level of networked computers and how attacks 
on them can affect factors mentioned above. For the purpose of policy as it relates to 
Ghana, the following sectors have been identified as CNII sectors: 
1.    National Defense and Security 
2.    Banking and Finance 
3.    Information and Communications 
4.    Energy 
5.    Transportation 
6.    Water 
7.    Health Services  
8.    Government 
9.    Emergency services 
20 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 10.  Food and Agriculture 
 
VISION 
A secure and stable connected Ghana with Internet users working and creating wealth 
in a safe cyber space, with a well-researched and trained academic and professional 
community  protecting  Ghana’s  cyber  space  equipped  with  global  standards  and 
responding swiftly to cyber incidents, and with up-to-date laws and systems in place to 
efficiently prosecute cyber criminals.  
 
MISSION STATEMENT  
To identify, analyze, address and remediate the immediate and potential cyber security 
threats posed on identified critical national information infrastructures (CNIIs) and put 
measures in place that will adequately regulate and secure the system infrastructures 
and meet the countries cyber security needs. 
 
POLICY SCOPE  
This policy covers all aspect of cyber security and national response including fight 
against  cyber  crime,  creating  public  awareness,  investment  in  education,  scientific 
research, and development of cyber laws and legal measures, national security, , law 
enforcement  and  protection  of  critical  national  information  infrastructures.  (We  can 
rephrase sentence) 
    
    
    
 
21 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 POLICY CONTEXT 
 
Ghana,  like  many  developing  economies  faces  the  risk  of  cyber-attacks.  Different 
uncoordinated initiatives are being put in place to secure the cyber space of Ghana. 
Many custodians of critical national information infrastructure are unaware of their roles 
in ensuring the maintenance of cyber security within the country.  The driving force 
behind the national policy is the realization that a combination of persistent computer 
vulnerabilities and worldwide connectivity has placed the national critical information 
infrastructures at risks.  
 
In Africa, Governments are discussing how to secure their cyberspace in the wake of 
heightened threats to national information infrastructure.  Several national initiatives are 
taking place to ensure that legal systems are updated to enable proper persecution of 
cyber criminals.  
 
The threat that cyber-attacks pose to African governments has prompted the African 
Union Commission to develop a convention at the regional level to harmonize the efforts 
of African countries in fighting cybercrime and ensuring cyber security.  
 
The cyber security policy will address major cyber risks facing Ghana from attacks on 
the  national  information  infrastructure.  The  policy  seeks  to  address  the  lack  of 
awareness of risks users and businesses face doing business in cyber space. The 
problem  of  “Sakawa”  which  has  tagged  as  a  haven  of  cyber  fraudsters  will  be 
addressed by the policy. The policy also addresses the need to develop knowledge 
base, systems and technology framework for combating cyber-attacks and capacity 
building for cyber security expects to make Ghana self–sufficient in the fight against 
cybercrime and in the near future create a culture of cyber security in Ghana. 
22 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 The National Cyber Security Policy (NCSP) seeks to address the risks to the Critical 
National Information Infrastructure (CNII)    which comprises the networked information 
systems of ten critical sectors. 
The policy recognizes the critical and highly interdependent nature of the CNII and aims 
to develop and establish a comprehensive program and a series of frameworks that will 
ensure  the  effectiveness  of  cyber  security  controls  over  vital  assets.  It  is  being 
developed to ensure that the CNII are protected to a level that commensurate the risks 
faced. 
The policy has been designed to facilitate Ghana’s move towards a knowledge-based 
economy and will be based on a number of frameworks that comprises legislation and 
regulatory,  technology,  public-private  cooperation,  institutional,  and  international 
aspects. 
 
 
23 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
I.  POLICY STATEMENT 
 
Effective Governance    
 
Government  will  centralize  coordination  of  national  cyber  security  initiatives  and 
promote effective cooperation between public and private sectors. In order to sustain 
the gains from any initiatives, government will establish formal and encourage informal 
information sharing exchanges. 
 
Legislative & Regulatory Framework 
 
Government through the Attorney General’s department set up a periodic process of 
reviewing and enhancing Ghana’s laws relating to cyber space to address the dynamic 
nature of cyber security threats. In order to empower national law enforcement agencies 
to  properly  prosecute  cyber  security  crimes,  Government  will  establish  progressive 
capacity building programs to acquire new skills and effective ways of enforcing cyber 
laws. Government will ensure that all applicable local legislation is complementary to 
and in harmony with international laws, treaties and conventions.  
    
Cyber Security Technology Framework 
 
Policy measures will be put in place to develop a national cyber security technology 
framework that specifies cyber security requirement controls and baselines for CNII 
24 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 elements.  This  will  be  accompanied  will  mechanism  to  implement  an 
evaluation/certification program for cyber security product and systems.  
  
Culture of security and Capacity Building 
    
Government  will  invest  every  resource  needed  to  develop,  foster  and  maintain  a 
national culture of security. As part of the process of development of culture of cyber 
security, government will support the standardization and coordination of cyber security 
awareness and education programmes across all elements of the CNII. Government will 
also: 
• Establish an effective mechanism for cyber security knowledge dissemination at 
the national level 
• Identify  minimum  requirements  and  qualifications  for  information  security 
professionals  
 
Research & Development towards Self-Reliance 
In  order  for  Ghana  to  become  self-reliant  in  protecting  the  CNII  to  a  level  that  is 
commensurate  with  the  risk,  Government  will  formalize  the  coordination  and 
prioritization  of  cyber  security  research  and  development  activities  enlarge  and 
strengthen the cyber security research community. Research and development will be 
encouraged  by  promoting  the  development  and  commercialization  of  intellectual 
properties, technologies and innovations through focused research and development. 
Government will also put measures in place to nurture the growth of cyber security 
industry. 
25 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 Compliance and Enforcement 
 
In order to ensure compliance and enforcement, policy measures and mechanism will 
be put in place to standardize cyber security systems across all elements of the CNII. 
Government  will  also strengthen the monitoring  and  enforcement of  standards  and 
develop a standard cyber security risk Management Framework. 
 
Child Online Protection 
 
Policy measures will be implemented through multi-stakeholder working by government 
industry,  Civil  Society,  and  relevant  international  child  online  protection  agencies.  
Government  will  encourage  dialogue  at  national  and  local  levels  to  engage  all 
concerned and create awareness of the possibilities and dangers of the Internet.  
 
Cyber Security Emergency Readiness 
 
To  ensure  cyber  security  emergency  readiness,  government  together  with  all 
stakeholders will develop effective cyber security incident reporting mechanisms. This 
will  include  the  development  and  strengthening  of  the  national  computer  security 
incidence response team (CSIRT) and sector CSIRTs, dissemination of vulnerability 
advisories and threat warnings in a timely manner and the development of a standard 
business continuity management framework. The government will also encourage all 
elements of the CNII to monitor cyber security events and perform periodic vulnerability 
assessment programs.  
26 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
         
 International Cooperation 
 
Policy measures will be put in place to encourage the active participation of Ghana in all 
relevant  international  cyber  security  bodies,  panels  and  multi-national  agencies. 
Government  will  make  every  effort  to  promote  active  participation  in  all  relevant 
international cyber security activities by hosting an annual international cyber security 
conference. 
 
 
27 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
c.  SECTION THREE: NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
28 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
     
 
FFFFIIIIRRRRSSSSTTTT    5555    ––––YYYYEEEEAAAARRRR    CCCCYYYYBBBBEEEERRRR    SSSSEEEECCCCUUUURRRRIIIITTTTYYYY    SSSSTTTTRRRRAAAATTTTEEEEGGGGIIIICCCC    PPPPLLLLAAAANNNN    ((((2222000011116666    ––––    2222000022220000))))    
For each policy thrust, specific strategic actions will be implemented under the first 5-
year strategic plan. These actions may be implemented in isolation or in concert with 
other strategic actions from other policy thrusts.    
IIII....  SSSSTTTTRRRRAAAATTTTEEEEGGGGIIIICCCC    AAAACCCCTTTTIIIIOOOONNNNSSSS    FFFFOOOORRRR    PPPPOOOOLLLLIIIICCCCYYYY    TTTTHHHHRRRRUUUUSSSSTTTT    
 
Action  Policy Thrust     Action Plan     Policy Drivers     Collaborators 
Item    
1.  Effective  1.  Government  will  set  up  cyber  security  Ministry of  National Security 
Governance  institutions and put in place governance  Communications,   Council, NITA, 
structure to ensure long–term sustenance 
  NCA, Attorney 
of  Cyber  Security  activity  including 
General 
information  exchange.  Action  will  be 
taken  as  collaboration  of  government, 
business and civil society (public private 
partnership Institutions). The institutions 
to be setup include: 
1.  National Cyber Security Council 
2.  National Cyber Security Center 
3.  National  Computer  Security 
Incidence    Response  Team 
(CSIRT) 
4.  National  Cyber  Security  Policy 
Working Group 
 
2. 
Legislative and  1.  Government will set up Cyber Law  Attorney  Ministry of 
Regulatory  Review  Committee  under  the  General’s  Communication, 
Framework  Attorney General’s Department to do  Department,   Ministry of 
29 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 a  study  on  the  laws  of  Ghana  to  Interior,  
accommodate legal challenges in the 
cyber environment and child online 
protection  and  review  every  three 
year 
Stage 1:  identifications of issues in 
the cyber environment  
Stage 2. Review current laws on 
cyber environment   
Stage 3. Make recommendations for 
amendment of national laws 
  
3.  Cyber Security  1.  Government in collaboration with key   NITA   Professional 
Technology  stakeholders  will  review  and  adopt  Security 
Framework  international  information  /  cyber  Associations, 
security standards such as ISO/IEC  Standards 
27000 series, NIST, etc to increase  Organizations, 
robustness  of  CNII  sectors  and  Universities and 
ensure safety in cyberspace for all  Professional 
2.  Government and its partners will also  Certification 
expand  the  national  certification  Centers 
scheme  for  information  security 
management & assurance. 
3.  A  standardized  Digital  Forensics 
Investigations Standards and Model 
will be developed that will be used by 
the academia to teach students, train 
law enforcement agencies and to be 
used  by  the  lawyers  and  expert 
witnesses in cybercrime cases. 
4.  Setup  professional  strong 
association such as  Digital  Forensics 
30 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 Association of Ghana 
4.  Culture of Cyber  1.  Efforts  will  be  made  to  reduce  Ministry of  Non-
Security & 
number of Information/cyber security  Communications,   governmental 
Capacity Building 
incidents  through  improved  Organizations, 
awareness  creations  &  online  skill  Universities, 
development  for  all  stakeholders  Professional 
including  children  by  developing  a  Certification 
National Cyber Security  Awareness  Centers 
program  and  portal  targeted  at  all  Cyber 
stakeholders  by  content  providers  businesses 
using different packaging for different   
demographics. 
2.  Capacity  will  be  built  through  an 
increased  certification  course  on 
information  and  cyber  security  to 
prepare  Ghana  for  self-reliance  in 
cyber security. 
3.  Targeted  capacity  building  will  be 
implemented for law enforcement on 
cyber investigation and enforcement 
to  improve  prosecution  of  cyber 
crime in Ghana. 
5. 
Research &  1.  A National R&D roadmap for Cyber  Ministry of  Ministry of 
Development  Security will be developed to ensure  Communications,   Education, 
towards Self– that Ghana will be self sufficient    Universities, 
Reliance  attending to its cyber security needs.  Council for 
2.  Technologies relevant & desirable for  Scientific and 
CNII will be developed.  Industrial 
3.  Domain competency development  Research 
will be provided for:  (CSIR), 
3.1. Natural growth of Cyber Security  Professional 
Industry  Certification 
31 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 3.2. Updating R&D roadmap regularly  Centers, 
4.  Build Research Labs at Universities  NITA, 
 
Compliance &  1.  A national Risk Management   Ministry of  NITA, NCA, 
6. 
Enforcement  framework for CNII will be developed  Communications  Ministry of 
 
to ensure a uniform framework for all  Environment, 
CNII.  Science & 
  technology, 
Professional IT 
Security Bodies, 
Private Sector 
(Finance, 
Network 
Operators), 
Research and 
Education 
Network 
 
Cyber Security  1.  A framework for mitigation of risk of  Ministry of  National Security 
7. 
Emergency  cyber attacks and ensuring structures  Communications  Council, Private 
 
Readiness  for swift responses to attacks that  Sector 
threaten national security through:  (Financial, 
•  Setup of National Cyber Crises  Operators), 
management  Committee  (under  Ministry of 
National Cyber security council)  Interior, NITA 
•  Positioning  National  and  sector 
CSIRTs in the line of responding 
to emergencies 
•  Setup of National Cyber Crises 
Management  WG  continuously 
reviewing structures and making 
recommendations to be acted on 
by committee 
2.  Organize  Hacking  Workshops  to 
32 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 exploit  systems  and  identify 
vulnerabilities 
8. 
Child Online  Develop a framework for the protection of  Ministry of  Ministry of 
Protection  children as they engage with the Internet  Communications   Gender, Children 
  which  ensures  that  agencies  and  and Social 
  stakeholders  work  together  to  Protection; 
address children’s online risk by  
  Ministry of 
Interior, Ministry 
1.  Ensuring  that    Organizational 
Structures   put in place for   of Educations 
•  A  Monitoring Framework 
•  Technical  and  Procedural 
Measures  for  working with all 
stakeholders  
2.  Capacity  Building  –  Awareness 
raising and public education. 
3.  Legal Measures  
4.  Implementation and International 
Cooperation 
 
International  Ghana  will  engage  in  relevant  Ministry of  Ministry of 
9. 
Cooperation  international cyber security and child  Foreign Affairs.  Communications, 
 
online  protection  meetings  and  National Security 
prioritize  engagement  and  join  or  Council, Ministry 
sign  International/regional  of Interior, 
conventions   Ministry of 
Gender and 
Child and Social 
Protection 
 
       
 
    
 
33 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
     
    
34 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 iiii....  SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    TTTTiiiimmmmeeeelllliiiinnnneeeessss    
 
The policy will be implemented in three stages: 
 
SSSSTTTTRRRRAAAATTTTEEEEGGGGYYYY     TTTTIIIIMMMMEEEELLLLIIIINNNNEEEE     AAAACCCCTTTTIIIIVVVVIIIITTTTIIIIEEEESSSS    
Short Term  Year 1 -2  IIIIddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffyyyyiiiinnnngggg    CCCCNNNNIIIIIIII    aaaannnndddd    aaaaddddddddrrrreeeessssssssiiiinnnngggg    iiiimmmmmmmmeeeeddddiiiiaaaatttteeee    CCCCoooonnnncccceeeerrrrnnnnssss – Identify CNII, 
analyze vulnerabilities and put in place stop gap measures while setting 
up institutional structures and creating public awareness 
The short term will focus on following policy thrust: 
Effective governance  
-  Implement Action 4 to assist ministry of communications and 
other stakeholders put in place a stop gap measure to identify 
CNIIs,  evaluate  vulnerabilities  and  develop  measures  to 
address immediate concerns.  
-  Begin building institution by implementing Actions 1 - 3 
Culture of Cyber Security  
-  Implement Action 2 to begin  awareness creation 
Cyber Security Emergency Readiness  
-   Implement Action 1 to develop framework 
Child Online Protection     Develop framework for engaging with all 
stakeholders 
•Coordinate with local universities or existing entities to help 
with the expertise. 
•Set up the COP stakeholder Committee to serve as the 
leading expert group advising the national Government on the 
formulation and implementation of a national COP plan for the 
Ghana. (Other actions stipulated in the Ghana COP strategy) 
 
Medium  Year 3 - 4  BBBBuuuuiiiillllddddiiiinnnngggg    tttthhhheeee    iiiinnnnffffrrrraaaassssttttrrrruuuuccccttttuuuurrrreeee    ---- Setting-up the necessary systems, process, 
Term  standards and institutional arrangements (mechanisms) and building 
35 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 capacity amongst researchers and information security professionals 
The medium term will focus on following policy thrust: 
Culture of Cyber Security & Capacity Building  
-  Implement Action 1  
Research & Development towards Self–Reliance  
-  Implement Actions 1 - 2 and accompanying infrastructure 
Compliance and enforcement 
-  Implement Action 1 and accompanying infrastructure 
Legislative and Regulatory Framework 
-  Implement Action 1 
Long Term  Year 5+  DDDDeeeevvvveeeellllooooppppiiiinnnngggg     sssseeeellllffff----rrrreeeelllliiiiaaaannnncccceeee  -  in  terms  of  technology  as  well  as 
  professionals, monitoring the mechanisms for compliance, evaluating 
and  improving  the  mechanisms  and  creating  the  culture  of  cyber 
security 
The long term strategy will focus on following policy thrust: 
Cyber Security Technology Framework 
-  Continuous review and improvement 
Compliance & Enforcement 
-  Enforcing adopted Risk Management framework within CNII for 
compliance 
Culture of cyber security 
-  Continuous awareness creation 
 
 
iiiiiiii....  SSSSppppeeeecccciiiiffffiiiicccc    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
   
Details of Specific initiatives including strategic objectives, estimated cost and drivers 
are attached in the appendix.  
 
36 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
 
 
AAAAPPPPPPPPEEEENNNNDDDDIIIIXXXX    
 
 
 
 
 
37 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX -1 
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
 
NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    PPPPoooolllliiiiccccyyyy    WWWWoooorrrrkkkkiiiinnnngggg    GGGGrrrroooouuuupppp    
Title of Program/Initiative 
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   •  To assist MoC to collate all cyber security initiatives  
 Objective  •  To identify critical national information infrastructure in 
sectors as defined by the policy 
•  To support policy drivers to setup structures for  
medium term strategy 
•  To design and implement a comprehensive National 
Cyber Security Awareness program  
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D  National Security, Law and order and enhanced cyber Security 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative  In order to have continuous activity on the Cyber security policy 
  and strategy, it is proposed that the current Adhoc technical 
38 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 committee for cyber security be converted to a Working Group 
(WG) to keep the momentum of the cyber security agenda to 
ensure a quick implementation of the policy and strategy. 
 
Description of Program/Initiative  The National Cyber Security Policy WG (NSCPWG) will be 
  made up of current policy drafting Adhoc technical committee 
which composition represent a public private collaboration and 
by virtue of the selection of the members, also represent a 
bottom-up  approach.  New  members  may  be  added  to 
overcome any shortfall in skill such as legal expertise in the 
conversion  from  the  Adhoc  Technical  Committee  to  the 
Working  Group.  The  NCSPWG  will  assist  the  Ministry  of 
Communication to establish recommended specific programs 
that  require  immediate  attention  such  as  the  awareness 
campaign for the first year of the policy. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  The rationale for the setting up of WG is to avoid any vacuum 
Rationale  between the adoption of the policy and the implementation of 
  the long term structures of the policy as well as begin a process 
of awareness creation. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  •  Support implementing agency to begin actual 
Specific Goals  implementation of strategy 
  •  Develop a National Awareness Creation Program on  
Cyber Security, including the creation of National Cyber 
Security Awareness portal 
•  Assisting policy implementing agencies to build the 
structures for the achievement of long term goals 
Program/Initiative Timeframe  One year in active engagement with policy implementation 
  (may be extended if necessary) but will continue in advisory 
role after first year 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
39 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
          
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee    ––––BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
National Cyber Security Awareness  3-months form policy adoption 
Program (NCSAP) 
National Cyber Security Awareness Portal  6-months from adoption of policy 
(NCSP) 
Identification of Critical National  12- Months from adoption of policy 
Information Infrastructure as prescribed by 
the Policy (CNII ) and immediate 
concerns. 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
  Document detailing awareness program including, workshops, media 
NCSAP  activities, online activities etc. and budget. The outcome of program 
will  be  well  informed  professionals  and  citizens  on  threats  in 
cyberspace and how they can guard against these threats. The main 
beneficiaries will be government security professional, citizens and 
businesses in Ghana.  
NCSP  Oversee the creation of Interactive Portal with all relevant information, 
  downloads and support where citizens can report incidences, seek 
support  and  receive  updates  of  latest  cyber  security  information. 
Outcomes will include a one stop shop for citizens and business to 
find everything on cyber security. The main beneficiaries are the 
citizenry, government   and businesses in Ghana.  
CNII  Oversee  investigative  work  to  determine  the  National  Information 
  Infrastructure and determine critical ones based on policy documents. 
NCSPWG will assist in selecting consultants to do exercise. The 
outcome will be a document with all details of CNII as it is today and 
expansion  plans  for  next  five  years.  The  main  beneficiary  is 
Government of Ghana.  
  Members of NCSWG must be rewarded for role for the period when 
40 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 COST  they are actively involved in implementation. This must include a 
seating allowance and expenses cover for any activity performed. If 
WG meets monthly, estimated Budget of GHC100,000.00 per year 
(seating allowance+ meals + venue)  ( In order to get the buy-in from 
any  entity  in  support  of  this  plan,  it  will  be  appropriate  to  state 
programme related costs as well or we simply refer to this budget as  
OVERHEADS.) 
 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
 
  SSSSuuuuppppppppoooorrrrttttiiiinnnngggg    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn         
  AAAAggggeeeennnnccccyyyy     AAAAssssssssiiiiggggnnnneeeedddd    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnssssiiiibbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    
Supporting  Implementation   Ministry of Communications  Oversight of NCSWG, project 
Agencies and their Assignment  funding / monitoring and evaluation 
Responsibilities  National Security Council  Technical/security input for defining 
    CNII and security advisory for  
  creation of new cyber security 
  structure  
National Information  Technical advisory and guide on 
Technology Agency/ National  collating CNII, web portal  
Communication Authority 
Program /Initiative Critical  Commitment of members to work to implement policy, motivation of 
Success Factors  WG members 
Program/Initiative  Inactivity of WG members or lack of needed support form Ministry of 
Implementation Risk Factors  Communications 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
 Non 
 
41 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX – 2  
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
 
NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    AAAAwwwwaaaarrrreeeennnneeeessssssss    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    
Title of Program/Initiative 
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   •   To define Security Awareness Goals and 
 Objective  Objectives 
•  To identify Intended Audience ( Stakeholders, 
General Public) 
•  To define Topics to be covered 
•  Identify Current Training Needs 
•  To obtain Support  
•  To establish Security Policy 
•  To define Delivery Methods to be used 
•  To develop a Strategy for Implementation 
•  To design Awareness Strategy 
•  To design Training Strategy 
•  To develop Evaluation Methods 
•  To create a National Awareness portal 
 
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D    
Culture of Cyber Security, Awareness creation 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative  The National Cyber Security Awareness Program shall be used 
  to stimulate, motivate, and remind the audience what is 
42 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 expected of them.  
Description of Program/Initiative  The National Cyber Security Awareness Program is a program 
  to  train  different  stakeholders  on  different  aspects  of  cyber 
security with the intent of helping them provide a reasonable 
security consummate with the risks to avoid incidences of cyber 
attacks.  This  will  take  the  form  of  identification  …,  need 
assessment,  training  and  evaluation  of  different  sets  of 
stakeholders.  The  program  will  include  a  cyber  security 
awareness portal that will establish a permanent  awareness 
campaign on the internet 
Program/Initiative Implementation  The rationale for the setting up the Awareness Campaign is that 
Rationale  an informed community is able to foresee any possible attack 
  and take appropriate preventive measure to overcome such 
attacks. The campaign will be targeted at main stakeholders 
and the general public to help develop culture of cyber security. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  •  To develop a level of awareness in the community to 
Specific Goals  mitigate risk of cyber attacks by workshops, mass 
  media and other awareness programs 
•  To develop a national awareness portal for easy 
access to information on cyber security and easy 
downloads for quick  fixes 
 
Program/Initiative Time-Frame  On-going program. In the first year, it is proposed that the 
  National Cyber Security Policy WG begin work on the program 
and hand over to the emerging organization that will be 
responsible for ensuring that the country attains a level of 
awareness to mitigate cyber incidences. 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
         
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee    ––––BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
43 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 Detailed Awareness Program Time table  3-months from Policy Adoption 
National Cyber Security Awareness Portal  6-months from adoption of policy 
Start of Delivery of Holistic Awareness  12 Months from adoption of policy 
program  
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
   
National Cyber Security  Informed stakeholders and public. Outcome in substantial reduction in 
Awareness Program  cyber incidences and crimes. Citizens and business in Ghana can 
work in emerging information economy in peace to create worth.  
Internet users in Ghana should  Know how get themselves a basic 
level of protection against threats online 
Estimated cost of entire program for 5 years will be about GHC2.5m 
for year one. Annual budget of about GHC500, 000.00  
National Cyber Security  One stop shop cyber security alerts, quick downloads and information 
Awareness Portal   on emerging threats. Interactive portal where questions can be asked 
through web 2.0 applications. Outcome will be informed community.  
Estimated cost of portal creation and maintenance for year one is 
GHC20,000.00  Subsequent  year  may  be  down  to  less  than 
GHC10,000.00 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
    
  Supporting Implementation   
  Agency  Assigned Responsibility 
Supporting  Implementation   Ministry of Communication &  Oversight of program; funding, 
Agencies and their Assignment  National Cyber Security Policy  monitoring and evaluation 
Responsibilities  WG (year one). National Cyber  ( Capacity building after year 2) 
  Security Council and Center to 
  take over by end of year 2 
  National Information  Technical advisory and guide on 
  Technology Agency/ National  web portal development. Capacity 
44 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
   Communication Authority  building for year one 
Ministry of Information  Support the awareness creation 
programs 
Program /Initiative Critical  Availability of Funding 
Success Factors  Commitment of supporting agencies 
Program/Initiative   
Implementation Risk Factors  Lack of funds and commitment to implement portal 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
 
 
45 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX -3 
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
 
NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    CCCCeeeennnntttteeeerrrr    ((((NNNNCCCCSSSSCCCC))))        
Title of Program/Initiative 
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   Strategic Objective of NCSC are : 
 Objective  •  National Cyber Security Policy Implementation: 
Defines, communicates and updates (when necessary) 
the national cyber security programs to all the CNII. 
•  National Coordination: Closely coordinates cyber 
security initiatives of various key Agencies and 
organizations in Ghana. 
•  Outreach: Promote and facilities formal and informal 
mechanism for information sharing across the CNII. 
This includes promoting cyber security awareness, 
training and education programs to grow the 
competency of information security professionals and 
the industry as a whole. 
•  Compliance Monitoring: Facilities the monitoring of 
compliance to cyber security policies and standards 
across the CNII. 
•  Risk management: Assesses, identifies and manages 
cyber security threats exploiting vulnerabilities and risks 
across the CNII  
•  Assist the National Cyber Security Council in all its 
function activities and help industry to test its 
emergency plans 
•  Contribute to application of international standards on 
46 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 cyber security as well as on accreditation and 
certification of ICT infrastructure, services and 
suppliers. 
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D  Effective Governance of National Cyber Security Policy 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative  The NCSC is part of the proposed institutional structure to be 
  created to sustain the cyber security policy in the long term. 
 
Description of Program/Initiative  The Ghana Cyber Security Centre is envisioned to become a 
  one-stop  coordination  centre  for  national  cyber  security 
initiatives by adopting a coordinated and focused approach, 
with  the  key  objective  of  strengthening  the  country’s  cyber 
security arena. 
The  centre  will  be  under  the  purview  of  the  Ministry  of 
Communications, and overseen by the National Cyber Security 
Council for policy direction and the National Security Council in 
times of national crisis. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  The rationale for the setting up the NCSC is the help establish 
Rationale  and institutional approach to coordinating the policies of CNII 
  sectors to ensure that the risks of attack are at the barest 
minimum  and  disaster  recovery  and  business  continuity 
processes put in place to take care of any eventual breach. It 
will also spearhead all awareness and education activities on 
Cyber security after creation. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  -  To make Ghana a safe destination for cyber activity  
Specific Goals  -  To boost national image in its sphere of influence and 
  make it a leader in the region 
-  To ensure that Ghana has technical skill to maintain 
low level of risk that will be achieved 
Program/Initiative time frame  To be set up within first two years. 
 
 
47 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
         
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee––––BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
Creation of Structures and function of  By 6 months from Adoption of the policy 
NCSC 
  By 12 months from the adoption of the policy 
Legal framework for establishment passed 
Financial Sourcing & Establishment of  By 18 months from adoption of policy 
NCSC 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
NCSC  Center  for  operational  coordination  of  all  cyber  initiatives  and 
continuously creating culture of cyber security 
   
   
   
 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
 
  SSSSuuuuppppppppoooorrrrttttiiiinnnngggg    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn         
  AAAAggggeeeennnnccccyyyy     AAAAssssssssiiiiggggnnnneeeedddd    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnssssiiiibbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    
Supporting  Implementation   Ministry of Communications  Developing structures, paper work 
Agencies and their Assignment  NCSPWG  for legal establishment, sourcing 
Responsibilities  funding for its establishment 
  National Security Council,  Establishment of physical 
  National Cyber Security  infrastructure to operationalize 
  Council (NCSCC)  Center, oversee operations of 
  Center after establishment 
Program /Initiative Critical  Legislative approval of initiative 
48 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 Success Factors  Funding of initiative by GOG and/or development partners 
 
Program/Initiative  Delay in passing necessary legislative instruments 
Implementation Risk Factors  Lack of funding 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
Non 
 
 
49 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX -4 
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
 
NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    CCCCoooouuuunnnncccciiiillll    ((((NNNNCCCCSSSSCCCCCCCC))))        
Title of Program/Initiative 
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   Strategic objective of NCSC are : 
 Objective  •  To oversee the national cyber security policy and 
strategy; 
•  To identify National cyber security priorities and 
initiatives 
•  To coordinate cyber security measures at the national 
level 
•  To help foster public-private relations required to 
address cyber security issues 
•  To collaborate with government agencies, security 
services, general directorate for security etc for the 
purpose of establishing standards and uniform 
investigative procedures and development of 
institutional consensus 
•  To collaborate with the structures responsible 
application of the law at regional and International level 
•  To coordination of measures and development of digital 
identity systems as well as management and best 
practice in digital identity 
•  To development of standards training and capacity 
building programs for agencies and the creation of a 
national platform for the purpose of coordinating 
50 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 technical assistance and training initiatives at the 
international level 
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D  Cyber Security and fight against cyber crime 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative  The NCSCC is part of the proposed institutional structure to be 
  created to sustain the cyber security policy in the long term. 
 
Description of Program/Initiative  The NCSCC shall be formed to serve as the high-level liaison 
  center for cyber security and shall be responsible for adopting 
or approving the policies put forward for implementation of the 
function center to be known as the National Cyber Security 
Center. The council shall be chaired by the Vice-President of 
Ghana. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  The rationale for the setting up the NCSCC is to serve as the 
Rationale  high level governance institution overseeing all issues on cyber 
  security.   
Program/Initiative Implementation  -  To ensure that appropriate policies are in place to 
Specific Goals  make Ghana a safe destination for cyber activity  
  -  To boost national image in its sphere of influence and 
make it a leader in the region 
-  To ensure Ghana is part international conventions and 
is playing its role as a leader in the region 
Program/Initiative Time-Frame  To set up within two years 
 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
         
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee----BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
Creation of Structures and function of  By  6  months from Adoption of the policy 
NCSCC 
  By 12 months from the adoption of the policy 
51 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 Legal framework for establishment passed 
Financial Sourcing & Establishment of  By 18 months from adoption of policy 
NCSCC 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
NCSCC  Governance institution with full oversight of policy and ensuring full 
implementation of policy after its creation 
   
   
   
 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
 
  SSSSuuuuppppppppoooorrrrttttiiiinnnngggg    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn         
  AAAAggggeeeennnnccccyyyy     AAAAssssssssiiiiggggnnnneeeedddd    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnssssiiiibbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    
Supporting  Implementation   Ministry of Communications,  Developing structures, paper work 
Agencies and their Assignment  NCSPWG  for legal establishment, sourcing 
Responsibilities  funding for its establishment 
  National Security Council,   Establishment of physical 
    infrastructure to operationalize 
  council, Oversee operations of 
council after establishment 
Program /Initiative Critical  Legislative approval for establishment 
Success Factors  Funding 
Program/Initiative  Delay or no approval of LI 
Implementation Risk Factors  Lack of funding 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
 
 
52 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX -5 
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
Title of Program/Initiative 
    NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCyyyybbbbeeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    CCCCrrrriiiissssiiiissss    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt    PPPPllllaaaannnn    ((((NNNNCCCCSSSSCCCCMMMMPPPP))))        
 
 
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   Strategic Objective of NCSCMP are : 
 Objective  •  To increase preparedness of country against cyber 
attacks 
•  To enhance capability to respond to cyber security 
issues 
•  To provide coordinated effort in handling cyber attacks 
•  to minimize impact to socio – economic activities 
 
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D  Cyber Security Emergency Readiness 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative  The NCSCMP was conceived to ensure that a coordinated swift 
  response is made to any cyber incidences having a bearing on 
national security.  
Description of Program/Initiative  A framework that outlines strategy for cyber attack mitigation 
  and coordination amongst Ghanaian CNIIs through public and 
private collaboration 
Program/Initiative Implementation  Rational for implementing this initiative to ensure the country’s 
Rationale  prepared to react to any cyber security emergency. The plan 
  envisages  a  management  committee  which  will  under  the 
council where ultimate decision are made on any major attacks 
and a working group created in as Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) and having membership from the center, the national 
53 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 CSIRT, CNII sectors and  any related agencies to enforce any 
tactic adopted for resolving any major attacks. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  -  Help Ghana maintain a level of readiness to react to 
Specific Goals  any major attacks 
  -  Ensure swift response to any major attacks by ensuring 
that decision making structures are in place and 
working smoothly 
-  Ensure that all CNIIs maintain their own emergency 
plan and test it from time to time. 
Program/Initiative Time-Frame   Come into place when NCSC, NCSCC and National CSIRT 
  have all been formed and in place. Time frame will be about 24 
months from the adoption of this policy  
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
         
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee    ––––BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
National Cyber Crises management  6 months from the setup of NCSC, NCSCC and National 
Committee  CSIRT 
National Cyber Crises management WG  6 months from the setup of NCSC, NCSCC and National 
  CSIRT 
National Cyber Crises management Plan    12 Months from the setup of NCSC, NCSCC and National 
CSIRT 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
National Cyber Crises  Decision making body at the national level for cyber attacks of with 
management Committee  national security implications 
National Cyber Crises  Implementation coordination of major cyber attacks that has national 
management WG  security  implications 
National Cyber Crises  Procedures for decision making and implementation of actions during 
management Plan  cyber emergency 
54 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
    
 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
 
  SSSSuuuuppppppppoooorrrrttttiiiinnnngggg    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn         
  AAAAggggeeeennnnccccyyyy     AAAAssssssssiiiiggggnnnneeeedddd    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnssssiiiibbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    
Supporting  Implementation   National Security Council,  Oversee formation of crises 
Agencies and their Assignment  National Cyber Security  management committee and its 
Responsibilities  Council  workings 
  National Cyber Security  Setup of Working Group 
  Center, National CERT, NITA, 
  CNII Sectors 
Program /Initiative Critical  Setup of National Cyber Security council 
Success Factors  Setup of National and sector CSIRTs 
Program/Initiative  Delay in setting up structures prescribe by policy 
Implementation Risk Factors 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
 
 
55 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
  
TECHNICAL PROPOSAL 
APPENDIX -6 
(STRUCTURING THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY PROGRAMS AND INTIATIVE) 
    
TTTThhhheeee    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    SSSSttttrrrraaaatttteeeeggggyyyy::::    PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmmssss    aaaannnndddd    IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    
 
 
NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmppppuuuutttteeeerrrr    SSSSeeeeccccuuuurrrriiiittttyyyy    IIIInnnncccciiiiddddeeeennnncccceeee    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnsssseeee    TTTTeeeeaaaammmm    
Title of Program/Initiative 
((((NNNNaaaattttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCSSSSIIIIRRRRTTTT))))        
 
Program /Initiative Strategic   Strategic Objective of National CSIRT are : 
 Objective  •  To provide reactive and proactive services, 
•  To communicate timely information on relevant 
threats, whenever necessary, bringing their 
assistance to bear for response to incidents  
Relevant Achievable National ICT4D  Cyber Security Emergency Preparedness 
Policy Objective & Goals 
Background to Program /Initiative   
 
Description of Program/Initiative  The Ghana National Computer Security Incidence Response 
  Team  is  to  be  established  to  take  charge  of  the  national 
information  infrastructure  protection  actions  and  serve  as  a 
base for national coordination to respond to ICT security threats 
at regional and international level.  The nation cert shall be 
empowered to execute the following minimum services. 
Program/Initiative Implementation  The rationale for the setting up the NCERT will be to … 
Rationale 
 
Program/Initiative Implementation  National CSIRT will be created to perform the following tasks: 
Specific Goals  (cid:1)  RRRReeeeaaaaccccttttiiiivvvveeee    sssseeeerrrrvvvviiiicccceeeessss::::  early  warning  and  precaution  notice, 
  incidents processing, incidents analysis, incident response 
56 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 facility, incidents response coordination, incident response 
on the web, vulnerability treatment, vulnerability analysis, 
and  vulnerability  response  and  vulnerability  response 
coordination; 
(cid:1)  PPPPrrrrooooaaaaccccttttiiiivvvveeee     sssseeeerrrrvvvviiiicccceeeessss::::  public  notice,  technological 
surveillance,  security  audit  and  assessment,  security 
installations and maintenance, security tools development, 
intrusion  detection  services  and  security  information 
dissemination, etc; and 
(cid:1)  AAAArrrrttttiiiiffffaaaaccccttttssss    ttttrrrreeeeaaaattttmmmmeeeennnntttt: artifacts analysis, response to artifacts, 
coordination  of  response  to  artifacts,  risk  analysis, 
continuation  and  resumption  of  activities  after  disaster, 
security  consultation  and  sensitization  campaign, 
education/training and product appraisal or certification. 
 
Program/Initiative Time-Frame  Should be in place in 18 months from  the adoption of the policy 
 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeeessss    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss    aaaannnndddd    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
    
         
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee    DDDDeeeelllliiiivvvveeeerrrraaaabbbblllleeeessss     TTTTiiiimmmmeeee    ––––BBBBoooouuuunnnndddd    MMMMeeeeaaaassssuuuurrrraaaabbbblllleeee    ((((TTTTBBBBMMMM))))    TTTTaaaarrrrggggeeeetttt    
  6 – months from approval of Policy 
National CSIRT institution 
 
Laboratories, early warning system  12 –months from approval of policy 
Full operational capacity  18 - Months from approval of policy 
 
PPPPrrrrooooggggrrrraaaammmm    ////IIIInnnniiiittttiiiiaaaattttiiiivvvveeee::::    OOOOuuuuttttppppuuuutttt,,,,    OOOOuuuuttttccccoooommmmeeee    aaaannnndddd    BBBBeeeennnneeeeffffiiiicccciiiiaaaarrrriiiieeeessss    aaaannnndddd    EEEEssssttttiiiimmmmaaaatttteeeedddd    CCCCoooosssstttt    
    
National CSIRT  Fully  functional  CSIRT  with  well  trained  staff  and  fully  equipped 
laboratories responding to cyber threats and maintain risk to the CNII 
57 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 at a reasonable level 
   
 
PPPPrrrroooojjjjeeeecccctttt    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    MMMMaaaannnnaaaaggggeeeemmmmeeeennnntttt,,,,    MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg    aaaannnndddd    EEEEvvvvaaaalllluuuuaaaattttiiiioooonnnn    
 
  SSSSuuuuppppppppoooorrrrttttiiiinnnngggg    IIIImmmmpppplllleeeemmmmeeeennnnttttaaaattttiiiioooonnnn         
  AAAAggggeeeennnnccccyyyy     AAAAssssssssiiiiggggnnnneeeedddd    RRRReeeessssppppoooonnnnssssiiiibbbbiiiilllliiiittttyyyy    
Supporting  Implementation   Ministry of Communications  Development of institutional 
Agencies and their Assignment  with support of CCI  structures of National CSIRT 
Responsibilities  National Security Council  Support implementation by making 
    security input and requirements 
  definition 
  National Information  Provide technical support for 
Technology Agency/ National  implementation of National CERT 
Communication Authority 
Program /Initiative Critical  Agreement on Support of CCI 
Success Factors  Willingness of MOC to implement initiative 
Program/Initiative  No drive from MOC 
Implementation Risk Factors  No agreement with CCI 
 
AAAAddddddddiiiittttiiiioooonnnnaaaallll    CCCCoooommmmmmmmeeeennnnttttssss    aaaannnndddd    RRRReeeemmmmaaaarrrrkkkkssss    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 | Page    N ati onal  Cyber Security Policy & Strate gy 
 