NATIONAL
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY 
2017-2021Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security.
Year 2560 - 2564
The Office of the National Security Council.
Office of the Prime MinisterKanawha
Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act 2560 - 2564 
(National Cybersecurity Strategy 2017 - 2021) by the Office of the 
National Security Council. It is the policy levels The first national edition 
Of Thailand in the field of cyber security.  To get to the state 
Going into socieUtsye rs full digital edition of this strategy in the future, so 
the main goal is to establish the readiness of Thailand to cope with. 
Cyber ​​threats extensively around as much as the state Environmental 
Eng.Facilitate repair To enhance the competitiveness of Thailand ins tohlidse erixnigst ing.
A stronger focus on a central mechanism for managing treatment. 
National Cyber ​​Security Protecting infrastructure Basic and raising 
awareness in all sectors and cooperation with foreign countries.
This strategy has resulted from brainstorming the different 
agencies involved. As well as the comments and suggestions from 
various sectors of the Office of the National Security Council, it is hoped 
that this strategy will benefit the relevant authorities for the function.
Go intToh teh eguidelines BJruitst dOivf idthee GenEedruaclation oTfh ceo sntfaidtiecn-fcraee cey bbeevr e rage
And show the public and private sectors, whereas the lazy lie-ins at the 
Pendleton heart of the local government in preventing and mitigating 
cyber threats with clear guidelines for Implementation at goal. and 
highlights tangible results As well as the importance of the participation of the public.
Office within the National Security brushed against.Content
page
Contents 
Introduction 
Overview of thTeim o fsfsceieanstcohene. NEadtuurcaaltion oTfh ceo sntfaidtiecn-fcrAee en abteiovnearal gceyber
Reliability 1
Readiness Assessment Problems and prospects of cyber threats. 5
thinking framework 14
objective 20
goal 21
SSttrraatteeggyy  11  SSttrreennggtthheenn  ccoonnffiiddeennccee  aanndd  sseennssiittiivviittyy.. trust 22
in MTahdeu rRaeiIgni othne LoopThoer igiTnh oef  cRyebikeir actionEvstyecprryee w 
SSttrraatteeggyy  22  PPrrootteecctt  ccrriittiiccaall  iinnffrraassttrruuccttuurree  ttoo  mmaannaaggee.. 23
EAldno ninformation system aPnodte pnutTilahslee d siemvaegAloesps eforr GPeant eCtrhoaelo  Mkc yoabtnoedrr s tthhere raets.t of 
SSttrraatteeggyy  33  AAnndd  pprrootteecctt  tthhee  iinntteerreessttss  ooff  nnaattiioonnaall  sseeccuurriittyy.. 27
Threats against the old style and new style.
SSttrraatteeggyy  44  SSttrreennggtthheenniinngg  tthhee  ddiiggiittaall  eeccoonnoommyy 29
SSttrraatteeggyy  55  RRaaiissee  aawwaarreenneessss  aanndd  pprroommoottee  sshhaarriinngg.. M Shthoer 30
Domestic workAs for GEednuecraatli oMno Totohf recs osntafitdice-nfarce ecey bbeevrerage
SSttrraatteeggyy  66  TToo  ccoonncceerrtt theU Osivnagl culturecyber space 32
On the rightSSttrraatteeggyy  77    PPrroommoottiinngg  pprreevveennttiioonn  aanndd  ssuupppprreessssiioonn..   34 
crime   
SSttrraatteeggyy  88  PPrroommoottee  tthhee  ccoonnssttrruuccttiivvee  rroollee  ooff  TThhaaiillaanndd   35
In a jointM Shthoer Tohrdee NroErdthu cCaetinotnra Tolhf ec osntafitdice-nfarce ecey bbeevrerage
The leBveMlulsoeSu enctatoinr sS atantdet hleev Ienltsernational 
Pafpalamcrtaao drseI n the UTKhsuec cess 37 
The table synchronization link mission.  39
The main strategic policy plans related to strategic. Security 
National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 2564.Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security.
Year 2560 - 2564Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security.
Year 2560 - 2564Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security.
Year 2560 - 2564 1. 
Na.
Telecommunications and Supervisory 
infrastructure that is important and will become even 
more important in the future. Due to technological 
developments. They're fast The country's leading 
technology. And ability The development of technology 
and access to the country's technological progress in the 
minor which technological progress. In response to this 
type of network technology. People have a lot of both 
groups.
IncreasesT ah e use of the Internet directly
Or contTahcet  project has benefited from the use of information technology 
in the network, such as indirect supervisory infrastructure. It also helps 
save time and reduce the cost of the ITU's 2558 report found that 46 
percent of households worldwide have access to the Internet.
For Thailand The use of Internet and systems. Digital is more 
like it Statistics from the Center for Technology and electronic devices. 
National Computer (National Electronics and Computer Techno- logy 
Center: NECTEC) in 2559, with the caller. The use of the Internet in Thailand 
Up to 40 million people, up from the previous user did not reach 30 
million in 2557, representing 16 percent ofT thhee  utostea lo. f the Internet in Asia 
Office within the National Security brus1hed against. Ta VCahllieay-offYong TSaaie nTn Tsdeuo taling approximately 250T.he people from the survey.
thTeh e use of computers and the Internet And through mobile phones 
Equipment and technology in 2558, Thailand's population.  use this
Internet, aged 6 years and above amounted to approximately 24.6 
million, representing 39.3 percent of the calTlehre.  user interface of the whole net. 
A groupI ncreases Aotf  tyhoeu athg e of 19 years or less. Which accounted for 
one-third (Or thTehe use of about 8.4 million peopleU)s oinf gth teh eca Ilnleter.r net 
From a survey of Office development of electronic transactions. (organization
Thailand) found that people spent an average 41.4 hours per week. use 
the Internet The smartphone is the most popular channels used to. 
Internet access And 80.9 percent of the desktop (desktop) and the use 
of a portable computer (laptop) is popular in second and third 
respectively and Facebook (Facebook) and offline (. LINE) into a 
communication signal.
The sharp oNnleinwei nPtore tmheiu lmot . Htoo ts kanwife Tmhee moryT achcoecm ekpesusytse or ns yTshtee mb 
Information and JImohpna cTNteerrNadyco Ttoio.n nasn  D olef athvee ntheed NFootrhrt eh GTihrles comfort 
In the daily life. But at the same time causing the risk. Be used in the 
wrong way and the potential threat to life is further increased by the 
disaster caused by unauthorized persoTnhse. bad guys use the Internet.
Crime and pursue interests in various forms and disasters to come. The 
system that monitors the user interface to the operating system and the 
Internet. Related infrastructure, which affects the life maintained. Public 
and business sectors Both in normal times and in times of emergency. Or 
disasters that affect the social, cultural traditions and beautiful.
2 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.It's pshheoorlsdt.oinng , New to IItnnghccrerro eeguaarposseeussp  cchhiilldd  WWoommeenn  TThhee  yyoouutthhIn  thchirgiesha a-s gseeps e bocyf.   Pat's 
Resulting from thSeAig nfiuepry or RockTS higgerno uiufispcea notf those benightedcyber space 
Misuse, such as using online media as a tool to disseminate the 
concept. Radical or persuade people to join the group. Increases to 
RCulirnigme or Orke athseo nRaut ltihneg  reWahdiychT toh eusecyber MySpacTeh ien tMothaec rhtehinseet 
The fault, in various forms, is deteriorating day by day. Spread wide 
Make supervision more difficult than this. In the political and military 
It is using the technology to obtain confidential information or use drilling 
technologyT nheet wnaotriko.noatAlhse rwell as the use of technological advances.And
Cyber ​​warfare is one of paint or varnish to their country. Advantage in the 
conflict, thereby maintaining a stable and secure. Information technology 
network and Internet security applications has continued. Defensive 
tackle can be drilled to attack the system and the Phoenicians.
This was a return to normal quickly, and not to the Internet. Be used in 
the wrong way into it. The coiomoff fplliecoicrattali onnTt  shuefob ofsu dindrdiivaairntiiegos nBt.h reia nstT uKhm.e Cp e.hcaonngoemic tdhaem  age
Political, social and defense The country is immune The same way
Cyber ​​Lahore and have the ability to compete. Competition with other 
countries in Lakewood dangerous man.
The GeTnheeDpr rarooeln tsPeatcu lTdtbisholioencn t'hsr eat from cyber InTdhuetcsh opternoy fGiindrte aonnfc de T.he static-frSewe ibmemveinrga ge
Cyber ​​World (GlobalCybersecurity Index 2017) by the International 
Telecommunication Union. (International Telecommunication Union:
ITU), which is used to measure the leSveigl noiff iMcaungt asbeeri.o us commitment in five areas. 
Legal measures Technical measures Organizational Development and 
Cooperation. Thailand was ranked 7th in Asia Pacific.  
Office within the National Security brus3hed against. And the 22 member countries of the ITU and in the light of the. 
Measurement capabilities in the event of any country in the world by the 
World Economic Forum reported that the index of competitiveness in the 
years 2558 - 2559 Overall rank reduced from Al Thailand. ThDeu brovnik 
31 to No. 32, but if you consider the infrastructure. The number of mobile 
telephone subscribers per 100 population is found within Thailand.
Ranked at No. 31 out of 34 in the year 2557- 2558 report 
by the availability of technology. In terms of membership Internet access 
per 100 inhabitants remain. At a higher level 
The amount of Internet bandwidth.  (Bandwidth) per abroad. 
thTeh is is one higher Network members and moving the pUhsoenres. who use the Internet
Broadband per 100 inhabitants was increased from 52.3 to 79.9 as the 
people make Thailand. Users in the top 23 from the prevRioaunsk uendi ta. t 38 
Statistics from the Internet and use of equipment and technologies 
mentioned above. Thailand suggests that people turn to rely on 
technology and applications. Internet increases Both personal and 
business use, so the necessary Zi Yong Yew at the Thailand should be 
important to set national cyber security policy is. clear and practical, 
tangible effects leUads.ers respond to cyber threats with timely performance. 
Both management and domestic partnerships. Foreign 
Because cyber threats is not a disaster. Specifically, in the country 
anymore, like hacking bank accounts of the Glastonbury Festival by 
malware attacks in Lahore over the SWIFT system resulted.
4 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.Damage worth more than $ 81 million with the transfer money to. Sri 
Lanka and the Philippines This is an example of cyber threats. If the 
country has strengthened policies and measures that will lead Stoi.gnificant treatment 
Cyber ​​security, sustainable, Thailand and other countries. 
2. to evaluate the readiness of problems and trends. Cyber 
​​threats
2.1 Readiness Assessment
To assess a country's cyber security into 5 main areas, 
namely along with the measures. Legal and regulatory The availability of 
technical mechanisms to. Dealing with cyber threats The availability of 
ppeerrssoonnnneell,,  aavvaaiillaabbiilliittyy  ooff  ssyysstteemmss  aanndd  tteecchhnnoollooggiieess..  AAnndd  gg
workT thoeg ewthoerTkrh beo noekws segment, and 
The cyber intelligence found
2.1.1 Readiness and legal measures. rule
Thailand recognizes the importance of maintaining 
stability. Cyber ​​security continues The law has several requirements. 
Measures of ConstErudcuticoantion oTfh ceo nstfaidteicn-fcraee ec ybbeevrerSahgaere it Exportsinto 
3 grouInpcsreases 
granting
  1) Law Tehxep reTshse H auutomotive electronics 
A. Define MeasuresTihmep ortaTnht ew coorknfidTehnec set aotfic-frIe teo obke vitTerorias rgkeeduce theY ong 
And cause reliability when.  Rotate the computer system or systems.
Office within the National Security brus5hed against. Internet transactions electronically. It covers both the Electronic 
Commerce Including through the provision of electronic services of the 
state. Or in e-government, as well as the security assigned to the unit 
that is the basic structure of this important country (Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection) must be followed. Security Measures And later 
with the enactment established. The Office of Electronic Transactions 
(Public Organization) or the Bank. This has set the authority's priority is to 
further enhance their skills.
This expertise in cyber security. As well as act Cyber ​​security 
coordinator Care Center (ThaiCERT).
2) The law allows law Or illegitimate children
The specific measures to supervise financial markets, the Bank of 
Thailand. And Capital Market Commission Securities and Exchange 
Commission. of Thailand Including the supervision of the insurance 
industry by the TCahonemd Gm tuhislefs,  piToahnre.t Thhaell assembly bTuphsreoi nveinscseeP'ssao gtr'dsue arrapnrteoevTidBheeri t
of the TThhee  ooppeerraattoorrss  iinn  tthhee  sseeccttoorr,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  ssuuppeerrvviissiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sseeccuurriittyy..    
3) the law of the offense. 
compuWtehrich CKonoDtnrigebfuintoer the aforeAmnedn tpioenneadlt iebsa soenFORT hCeO aNccStiroTinRmsUeC TION
computer  The Division of Prevention and Suppression of Crime. 
Technological under The Ministry for Economy and Digital Society and 
Crime Suppression Division on Technology Crime under the heavy tasks, 
the survey of national attention.
6 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.In case of heavy and Information Technology under. Investigation 
Department of Justice computer chip. Check the Crime Technology 
Information Technology Center under the Office of the Anti-Money 
Laundering Agency is fully operational.
However, the specific security measures ensure 
secure.I took itIn law Ctohnec deamrntauinsgt N htaoaivne  the PosImtinportanTt he measures
obPvrieavteednt or reduce the risk of creatingT.h is specialized security 
And define offenses and penalties. This could cover only Some 
dimensions of cyber security only. It is also necessary Must be 
strengthened to enhance the preparedness of the field. To cover the 
dimension of surveillance, threat. Or the implementation of any 
necessary when attacked or when the girl makes contact SKRrisG aBt  ias  ssahfoet.
Cyber ​​as well as specific measures to work jointly. Related Agencies 
When faced with an attack Or such a crisis That could affect a significant 
and severe. The impact of Stability of the country as a whole
in additionth,e TRhICe Olack of reacCtaioonnmd mlinaensd  of fTohuer basis for the 
Management's cyberspace.  At the regional and international levels.
Thailand, which also should give priority to supporting the operating 
norms and guidPerblianecettwsic.eeesFn oreign Usainectrcose wpth o the orTdhNeere w YTohrek  cCoollnMacb eSorrhttahoteirv e
During the course the country has a stable free beverage. And a cyber 
defense Cyber ​​conflict between states may occuMra.ps in the future. as the 
There must be a push to prepare the policy framework or treatment 
strategies. Cyber ​​Security and the National Security Law. The next 
urgent cyber security.
Office within the National Security brus7hed against.   2.1.2 The availability of technical mechanisms to 
cope. Cyber ​​threats
presSenatban even Thailand will be important in the story.
Security encompasses more respectively. And the performance of the 
unitCso.mpliance with various units such as the work of the Coordinatiothne C fiexnetde r of confidence.
non PatA cyber (The Computer Emergency Response Team). 
Or Thailand Surt (ThaiCERT) of the Office of Electronic Transactions. 
(ITD), which helps to protect and coordinate the work has the cyber 
security and begin to work in the form of the CERT.
To check to see who is responsible for the organization and the 
private stheec tToohrri egh iaDnvivei saiolrne aodf yP breeveenn otiro anr aen odf fS. uppression of the offense. 
Technology under the Office of the Secretary of State for the digital 
economy and society. Crime Suppression Division on crime. Technology 
under the Office of the National Police, Office of the Information and 
Technology under the Department of Special Investigation. The Justice 
Department investigate the offense technologies. Information Technology 
Center under the Covenant.
A job the GLaouandering and Financial Or at The Bank PaTrhadaeiland
But then any form of work, such as working in a defensive posture. And 
get on with cyber threats only. It has set up cyber centers. Department of 
Information Technology and Space Defense Thailand's army or to cope 
With cyber threats proactively, give more.
However, if you look in the whole of the country, it 
also needs to push for a coordination mechanism and a link between the parties.
8 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.These agencies act  And the implementation of concrete. 
Especially in the field of news and intelligence, which encompasses the 
key. Greatly to the mission of the officials assessed the situation and 
decided. The need to improve mechanisms for monitoring. And 
monitoring and evaluation The country has no agency that has the 
power. And responsible for the security of the cyber directly.
Therefore it is absolutely necessary to have center. 
This direct action to raise the level of protection and response. Threats 
and cyber attacks are likely to be complex. Violence has increased in the 
order.
2.1.3 The availability of personnel at 
the readWy.ith techTnhiec aplersonnel is extremely important. 
In terms of awareness  If the cyber threats and the policy level. 
Practice and Knowledge This specialization The survey
Found that more than 50 percent of public and private agencies have not 
given priority to. Plan to develop cyber-security and 79 percent of the 
units will be restricted to motivate staff. Capacity for self-examination 
certificate as maintaining confidence.
The static-frae ec ybbeevreraTghee certificates Ap oliceImt'saa cnnca aetutp rBtaul ftfoa lothe 
Thailand internationally, which should set the direction and importance. 
Promoting and supporting the development of a hole. This expertise 
in The confiTdheen cseta otifc-fare cey bbeerveTroai gnecreaseThe eTshtea tneatuTrhael  creeCtshdotra eoGrakut's.s  's Pat 
Potentially in the form of a comprehensive and cost-efficienPcicyk.ing up
Office within the National Security brus9hed against.   2.1.4 The availability of systems and 
technologies. Thailand still lacks a system to mIannteargfea cteh eA ncecetwsosorkr.ies
The stability of the country and had to rely on foreign countries in this 
field. Thailand should turn to give priority to the development of systems 
and technologies in the field. The cyber security seriously. To reduce 
dependence National treatment to foreign and national interests and 
national security. Carefully concise and standaArdttieznetdio tno gtoe tshterer.ngthening the system. 
And technology imported from abroad.
2.1.5 with the investigation
News and cyber intelligence There is currently a lack 
of Integration and the importance of capacity development potential. The 
cyber intelligence Basu The course is an impTohreta anttt epnatriot no ft oE guynpdte.rstand.
With the threat of new forms, especially cyber threats that would 
complement the work of investigative journalism and, overall, too.  
2.2 Problems and prospects of cyber threats.
2.2.1 in PalmCauTrreecnhtnlyo Blougfyfalot he SaPuadkiornA enleewct ronicKnicks
IThe nTehwe p vaegrey devices that can access smaller. Or a variety of choices 
available The devices used in daily life to. Relying on the Internet more 
like phones, GPS, cameras, medical devices.
At the same time, it is a weakness that cause the risk of 
disasters. Cyber ​​easier, whether users or attackers are at any point in the 
whole wTohrlids  fios uonftde.n used to emphasize safety as a secondary emphasis 
on comfort and service. 
10 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  2.2.2 The risk of being attacked in many ways, 
including the importance of infrastructure such as electricity, water, gas 
pipeline, using malware to attack systems to monitor and control the 
operation of the system. Utilities or public services, such Saisg nthifriceaantet nsiunsgp.end attacks
Site using DoS / DDoS (Denial of Service / Dis- tributed Denial of 
Service) and the public can not access the site at.
To use The Brit Intion cslaumdepdle m  Al  portiTomhne ao lfw tahTreeype Ransomware 
To encrypt important documents in the victim's computer to call. The 
ransom was paid to attack one another appearance.
2.2.3 borderless world financial markets as a result. 
Technological and financial innovation have lead to rapid progress. The 
development of new financial instruments such as financial Crowd 
Funding Application and Financial Platform, as well as be prepared. The 
availability in various areas to accommodate the changes that take place 
as a coPne.rfoTrhaete rde gPulCalatoetomrying to Tahefsine Gactunolcfr isaV.li ew andT o create Tahe reliabTilhpitoym mo fas 
To the  The service in the security of information systems. Information 
technology, risk management, financial linkages. The capital movements 
And transaction volumes increase
2.2.4 local authorities to give priority. Dealing with the 
planning and rehearsing the scene after the incident at the scene and 
standards. The ability of the Phoenicians. This letter (Resilience)  
After cyber threats, which are extremely important to maintain. Continuity 
of operations in different dimensions by helping to reduce the impact 
occurred. From cyber threats to a minimum.
Office within the National Security brus1h1ed against.   2.2.5 cyber terrorism and cyber war paint. 
(Cyber ​​terrorism / Cyber ​​warfare) Thailand is one country. 
There is a risk of becoming a cyber-terrorist actions by the state. Or 
individual / groIunpcreases individualsI nacsrT ewhaeisslle  tases rt rhgoerro isumps i.s  terrorism. 
Cyber ​​also includes online media fields to be used as a publishing tool. 
The popular concept of violence or terrorism, weapons instruction and 
materials used as weapons, including how to apply for membership and 
terrorist ideology as well. This is for Thailand Must Watch The risks may 
be motivated to do so, and the Cyber ​​Warfare that Thailand must develop 
the capacity to control the cyber-dimensional effect. To make war In 
order to protect national interests and maintain. National security threats 
caused by this new model.
2.2.6 lack of security awareness. Cyber ​​security In 
particular, the use of the Internet by the user. The applications 
IsJaohn TTehrroymSofua tmsh emA .pa orys t.Guitsmo's pG oerntaenrta El dMuoctaotriso.n oTfh ceo sntfaidtiecn-fcrDeeueb bradvoei avvcnneeigr.ka e  girnoetuos  
And emphasis on comfort is key. We need to raise awareness This to 
public ToursS ignificantT thoe t hues e of the Internet at all levels aware of the threat.
Cyber ​​and how to deal with this problem.
2.2.7 The spread of cyber threats. Risks Cyber 
​​security, as well as many forms of damage to the system. Espionage 
information on the computer system. (Commercial, financial information 
or personal information), or even attack infrastructure is. Significant 
strides that can lead to economic disruption and gain.
12 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.Damage or danger to life and property of the caller. The people by the cyber threat
These are all evolving rapidly with advances in technology.  
Overall the situation The ar With the country VcoengcTaeshr enP eGodoeTlnhReeer astl  Public
And risk management conditions cyber threats also has several 
limitatioWnsh.ile the the SucOconef s tDhseo nleafltd sCoTonhorke oant aL T up with a novelty.
Always refer to the incident discovered vulnerabilities. An operating 
system or application software of the device IoT (Internet of Things), 
which has been used extensively over the last several years, allowing 
hackers to illegally install malware programs. threats on Computers with 
vulnerabilities and malicious code embedded. Can damage Information 
provided to victims of such WannaCry Ransomware is malware called. 
Ransom data encryption allows the callTerh.e user can not open for use.
And that spreads itself through a system vulnerability to attack Windows 
operating result in the outbreak is fast or wider than the old Mirai Botnet 
Basu.  Part of a malware attack, a device IoT. 
The hacker can attack the system's computers.  The otheUr swearss  in
Computer network in a DDoS (Distributed Denial-of- Service) and 
provides network services and Internet services that target. Attacked the 
lack of availability.
Moreover, according to statistics from many places. Thailand 
has indicated that There is a risk of cyber securityI.nternational institutions such as
In the ranking of the competitiveness of the Member States or the 
International Institute for Management Development (IMD). 
Office within the National Security bru1sh3ed against. World Digital Competitiveness Rankings assessment report has ranked 
63 economies found that the ability to compete. Digital Thailand in 2559 
to No. 41 from No. 39 in 2558, and in knowledge.
ThiAs tw Naos.  44 from No. 42, although the availability.
Overall, the future AdAt adthnaegm Berroiauns,  45 fromA tD 4idD8rka,u nbbguroet vronuiks.  foundIt hascbth aetehpfo eadr coeit t.y 
In the field of IT integration Even at the top 55 ranking will improve from the ranks. 
57 in 2558, but the E-Government within Thailand.  Ranked at 55 
And the field of cyber security unit.  At No. 38 
In summary, then, Thailand has to deal with cyber threats 
remTahienn.  at a certain level But it can also develop the capacity to cope. 
For more powerful than ever, to keep pace with the threats. Cyber 
​​change As the rate quickly. Particularly in response to the attack 
was to promote literacy. This understanding and awareness overall.
Cyber ​​security And integrated management of the treatment. Cyber 
​​security in both government and between government and other sectors 
as strategic security, cyber NATIONAL 2560 - 2564 has indicated that 
the operation took place.
thinking framework
Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act 2560 - 2564 
National Strategic Framework Guidelines from the field for 20 years, 
which is defined in terms of security strategy (5) development mechanism 
measures. and international cooperation at all levels to protect.
14 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.And tackle transnational threats. Reduce the impact of disasters and 
terrorism. Strengthen the information technology and cyber and (6) the 
development of capacity building. Restructuring, capacity and equipment 
suitable for the development of effective intelligence work and 
cooperation with neighboring countries.
In addition, national policies and plans with the National Security 
(AD 2560-2564) was identified cyber threats as one. Security threat by 
set guidelines on issues 03/07/15 defense.
And solvseolvTeh teh ep opsrosbibleiTlimthye o cf oMnusmtant cybBeyr  A. Set goals 
Strategic metrics and strategy follows.
Strategic goals
Thailand, a country of security and availability. Dealing with 
cyber threats
Indicators 
1) the readiness of Thailand to prevent the risk. Cyber ​​attacks 
are in line with international standards.
2) cyber defense system that can effectively protect the 
electronic data of the government. The cyber infrastructure is important.
Office within the National Security bru1sh5ed against.   strategy 
1) pulsTeesstinYg odue'rvee lcoappearble othfe LPorudblic seRcetaodmpre i loptithraagerrat ymen, niecztiniavrteti,li  o tmhneas tOterresg.on 
And police and domestic sectors to prevent and resolve. Cyber ​​security 
problems Supports digital society
2) develop a framework for international cooperation and 
ASEAN. Preventing and cyber security.
3) development of knowledge.  And this awareness  the
The importance of cyber security threats. 
4) protection against cyber threats. Cyber ​​warfare, cyber security 
and strengthening. By integrating security management. Cyber ​​between 
government agencies. And strengthening cooperation network. With all 
parties inside and outside the country.
5) the development of legislation and regulations inT ohred esrig. nAintg cso Tnhsotamnats 
non PatA total of cyber mltheT peuclhsneoslogy evAoGslue ftnoioerTn rhael  MwooTtrohkr esb ogoakrdent haen dGthoea
cyber crime 
6) promote capacity development of all sectors of the 
organization / personnel assocTiahtiesd e wxpitehr ttihsee  seintec.o mpasses areas continues.
In the Plan, 12 have been identified in the strategy to strengthen 
the 5th National Development into the country.  at the 
Prosperity and sustainability The stated goal in the fifth that Thailand is 
ready. Response to Threats The military threats and other threats, which 
are three indicators include indicators 5.1 The duration of the mobilization 
capacity. The threat indicators to a 5.2 rating from a risk of terrorism.
16 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.Less dSSwanttoaagrrrledbbr uuo(ccOukkslssd ..th  h22aa00mn  oo aff  ttt hhee   BRusishk's  Yong of the world's WEF) aTnhdiKen nC diifhceaa Vntotaarslll.e y 
5.3 The risk of cyber attack in less than a 10th of the world (the world of 
cyber safety index. International Tele- communication Union: ITU) and 
the strategic development of the 7th. Infrastructure and logistics. The 
goal of 5 development. Digital Economy to expand broadband coverage. 
Across the country And create a new digital businesses, including 
increased development.
The evolutionary Tshyset esmta tMic-ufrmAee c byebveerrageA composPitiiencksienrgti nagn dC lock the
To meet international Psatat'nsrGd eFoaslkrto duorsa.nl  The threat online by B at thime pOovratal nt. 
Msuaby cTohnes cniuomuPsblueybr loicf  suencittsoRr eaTaghpeen csiyesstem MThuem static-frAee c byebveerrageincrease 
Including creating cyber security. By integrating surveillance And tackle 
cyber threats to take care of the problem and deal with the threat. 
Changing with advances in technology, especially security. In the 
financial sector safety and security of personal information by a 
development plan is to improve telecommunications infrastructure. 
Country thoroughly and efficiently Promote the use of digital technology 
To add value to the business, promote innovation, research and 
development. Thailand's digital industry and space technology devealonpdm tehnist  knowledge.
People skills And to strengthen cyber security.
Plans to develop a digital economy and society have been 
identified in the Strategy 6 building confidence in the use of digital 
technology. Focus on laws, regulations, rules and standards for the 
effective date and in line with international guidelines. To facilitate reducing barriers.
Office within the National Security bru1sh7ed against. Enhance the activities and transactions online, including building security 
and confidence, as well as protection.  The protection of rights
To the The use of digital technology in all sectors. To support the growth 
of technolDogMigyeitAataln ld the the Increase in rent. To createT hae reliabTilhpitoym mo fas 
The use of digital technology and online transactions.  Stability 
Security of Information Systems and Communications to build confidence 
amonRg.  bTGuhisleli npeusbsleics a anndd t hseec mtoerTsdh.iae substanceT cahlnead sa stuihftieoe mdN oboturitvshein oenslsinees .Regulations
Measures VirgiVl alleA pnady mNaeTtnhutera crleysbte Pr atht rCeaotosk.'s  AtAppropriate and comtphleie s wheels
According to international standards ThCer ePartoet ethcteTin hfgreaT mShpeea bcaesTVehiella geIntthoe 
Devilish (critical infrastructure), such as infrastructure projects create 
electricTityh.eT Shpea fcineancial baPsreovides secure enough to trade. 
And investment to create a network share cyber threat. With regulations 
and establish a mechanism whereby the agency notified law 
enforcement. Effective in Prevention and Suppression of Crime affects. 
Digital security system
in addition, The ASEAN summit Crutcher  Toast 28 and 29 
In Vientiane  Since 2559 the Prime Minister has offered.
ASEAN establishment of monitoring and surveillance, cyber threats.
thThe only big Requires legal measures, as well as together. 
Promote cooperation network between agencies and personnel involved. 
This may lead Utosers set up a cyber-ASEAN Center This reflects the 
priority. Thailand, the government has to maintain security and cyber 
security. International Cooperation
18 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  The 20-year strategic framework, national policy and national 
plan. That the MUaselwrsa rmeaintain (nAatDio n2a5l 60-2564) Plan. 
No. At 12, and plans to develop a digital economy and society, the 
concept of prime farmland in beTtwheee dno.tted KdrimeTs hsSeu ASEAN Outstanding 
The cyber threat assessment and readiness of Thailand that is lower 
than expectation.
TiaCTnoh negn gZ di pmProcessing Strategy for Security Studies free. Swimming 
Cyber ​​NATIONAL 2560 - 2564 as a framework. Thoef  tohreig wino rk 
Applicable to all sectors, both public sector and private sector, with 
emphasis on the balance between the rights of citizens and the powers of 
the state. Policy to control and maintain order in society.
vision
Cyberspace is likely in ThailandS. RGB will ensure safety in all sectors. 
Are equipped to deal with cyber threats and cyber-based collaboration. 
creatively To promote economic stability and a better quality of life.
Office within the National Security brus1h9ed against. YToiomn scientchee NEadtuurcaaltion Tohf ec osntafitdice-nfarce ecey bbeevreNraagtieonal
Year 2560 - 2564
objective
1.  To build confidence and trust in all sectors. To all 
forms of cyber activities.
2.  To protect infrastructure critical to managing it. Information 
systems and development work The response to cyber threats 3.
To protect the interests And the national security threat from 
the old style and new style.
4.  5 to enhance the digital economy. 
TAo buThe integration and coordinMa tSiohTnoh breo tdoyt.aTlh eex psewcatped John 
Information security, cyber security agencies.
6.  The development agency And empowerment 
Cyber ​​security personnel.  
7.  To promote the culture of Cyberspace responsibly.
8.  To promote the prevention and suppression of crime 9. 
To promote Thailand's role in maintaining security. Cyber 
​​regional and international levels.  
20 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.goal
• Various sectors of confidence and trust in the activities. 
Cyber ​​format
• Infrastructure management with important information. And 
tthhee  ccoouunnttrryy''ss  oovveerraallll  ccaappaacciittyy  ttoo  rreessppoonndd  ttoo  ccyybbeerr  tthhrreeaattss..  ••  
And national security interests to be protected from. Threats 
old style and new style.
• Country Change throughS aigt nthifeic daenat tehc.o nomic damage that the use of digital technology Tulsa. 
Smooth and sustainable
• All sectors are aware of the threats and cyber. 
Cooperate on cyber security.
• Thailand has a culture of cyberspace responsibly. 
• Integration and cooperation, including the exchange of 
information between agencies.
• The task of preventing and combating crime, strengthened 
investigation and coverage, quality and security.     
• The agency is ready to fulfill the mission. Accurately 
and quickly
• Personnel security, cyber security expert. And potential 
performance.
• Thailand's role in promoting security automaticSaRllGy.B is safe
Cyber ​​internationally and reducing cyber conflict between states. 
Office within the National Security bru2sh1ed against. SSttrraatteeggiicc  SSeeccuurriittyy  NNaattiioonnaall  CCyybbeerr  ​​S​​Seeccuurriittyy..  SSttrraatteeggyy  11  SSttrreennggtthheenn  
confidence and trust. In all sectors in all forms of cyber activities.
goal 
1. The Government gives priority and support policies. The 
field of cyber security.  
2. The business sector and the public confidence in the user. 
digital technology Internet and cyberspace as standard. The use of 
government services. Business and personal
Indicators
1. Government support, strategic security. National 
cyber-effective manner.
2. The levels of confidence in the minds of the public and 
private sector in the use of digital technology and cyberspace.
Guidelines for action
1.1 The policy gives priority to maintaining stability. cyber 
security To support policies on treatment. Cyber 
​​security
1.2 devCelroepamtee dnetveTlohpee Lr oNprradotjuercatls resToou rRcTeehasep i nD teThphpeuer sot yep ceGtroetJyrni'Tmseu r ealld lge
And tackle cyber threats To strengthen the trust of the various sectors to 
liaise with the state.
22 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  1.3 Promote the use of digital technology and the Internet 
to the wTheeb .citizens of the wFineddoewralR aegaepn caineds publCico rreinlaitCitmnohthi  iopAatuhnunureslcsss h ter i ap.eople
Get informed and confident in using the services of state agencies.
1.4 encourage government transparency. And using 
technology Activities by taking the cyber protectioTnh.e Rights and Liberties
As well as the privacy of the callTehr.e  use of online government services 
1.5 build confidence and trust in sectors other than government. The 
opportunity and supply channels to the public. To engage with 
government agencies to develop and improve technologies. And 
cyber activities. To meet requests.
thTTehh iiss  sseerrvviiccee  11..66  PPrroommoottiinngg  tthhee  pprriivvaattee  sseeccttoorr  iinn  vvaarriioouuss  ffiieellddss  aatt  aallll  
levels of business by using the internet and digital technology in 
cyberspace. The broader Standard By promoting proactive and ask for 
cooperation from the private sector.  
SSttrraatteeggyy  22  PPrrootteecctt  ccrriittiiccaall  iinnffrraassttrruuccttuurree  ttoo  mmaannaaggee..  WWiitthh  tthhee  
development of information systems and capabilities to address cyber 
threats.
goal
1. Thailand has integrated the work of healing. National 
Cyber ​​Security
Office within the National Security bru2sh3ed against.   2. Have the central authorities to maintain stability. National 
Cyber ​​Security And determining the roles and responsibilities of various 
state agencies clearly. To oversee the protection of critical infrastructure. 
The management information system with both public and private.  
3. The work of the organization in different formats that can 
work. The deal with cyber threats in a more CERT.
Indicators
1. Just as the Tua Unit for the contents of the General 
Education National Cyber ​​Security's worth and capabilities.
2. Prepare the report prepared for stability. Cyber ​​security 
agency that is considered critical infrastructure. The Management 
Information System  
3. The number of organizations that have prepared a plan to 
protect its infrastructure. Important for Management Information System.   
4. the NIonr tthhe hoTleype of treaTtmhee ntatsk of CERT in tuIhnneci treseAuargsoeeznsoc niees. 
The importance of infrastructure increases totaling more so. The 
operation integrated with the federal agency to be established.
Guidelines for action
2.1 preparation of policy / strategy. Lahore Security 
National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 - 2564 for protecting infrastructure 
essential to the management of information systems.
24 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.Review and evaluate the Implement policies to improve. Policy, the 
situation has changed.
2.2 the establishment of the Federal Agency for Security. 
National Cyber ​​Security To be responsible Central level Policies, 
reporting directly to the Prime MinisterBy centric security
non Pataa  ccyybbeerr  AAnndd  ccoooorrddiinnaatteess  tthheeT  ciihnnreittteeiycrr'aaarIenccl  ttEiioolnndTohne coordination VirgVilallet hpea y ment
Responding to manage cyber threats. Raising Awareness As well as the 
coordination body M ShToori and in Foreign and promote development.
Ability to handle cyber threats by the various authorities could consider 
establishing appropriate follow-up support. 
2.3 prepare a report on the readiness of the agency. The 
infrastructure The basic key to the management of information 
systems. The public and private sectors Along ranking priority. Prepared 
for operators Plan and Incident Action Plan
2.4 defines the role and responsibilities of the various 
agencies of the state in protecting critical infrastructure managed by the 
system. Information explicRitloyt afrtiee nddealing with cyber threats in guard. 
Normally, when the PhoeMnaicpiasn asn sdc PeTnhheoe e nRiceihaanbs ilitation after accident Including remedies
Editing effects, including a mechanism for coordination and cooperation 
wTithh isth ien vporilvvaetde  tsoe pcrtootre acnt din tfhraes ctraulcletur.r e. The basic key to managing it.
Thailand's information systems from cyber threats.  
2.5 Promote the preparation of plans for infrastructure 
protection. Importance of management information systems with rapidly changing. In public and private
Office within the National Security bru2sh5ed against. To each organization's principles, protecting infrastructure.Key Executive
Management Information Systems Agency's own potential by virtue of 
the first unit and in the event of an emergency situation or raise. The 
maximum capacity of the unit You can synchronize the support was 
timely.  
2.6 Promote management training to deal with the threat. 
Cyber ​​nationally Be prepared to deal with the situation. Encompasses a 
variety of forms, including in crisis.
2.7 Draft and revise the law Rules and regulations for the 
check and framework for cyber security. On the set plays, Goku.
The protection and appropriate sanctions 2.8 
development of personnel in the public sector through education. 
Training in various forms, and promotes knowledge traWnsitfheirn. this sector,
State or between public and private sectors. As well as giving priority to 
development. Positions in government support the growth of medical 
personnel. Appropriate cyber security In order to maintain staff The field 
of cyber security in the bureaucracy.
2.9 Development of research and development of 
treatments. Cyber ​​security As well as cooperation with the private sector. 
And access to foreign technology. Finances and Development of 
markets for industrial cyber security. And lead to reduced dependence 
from abroad.
2.10 promote the participation of the private sector seriously. 
To maintain consistency, it's cyber security.In EldTohne modTehren idzeedvethloep heorleth e
26 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.And technology development The security To enhance the 
capabilities in cyber security. The country's holistic
2:11 develop and stimulate  This provides a mechanism for review.
Cyber ​​security evaluation standard for security in the whole of the country. 
2.12 encourage the work by deploying measures. Technical 
characteristics of the operations coordination center, or CERT Cyber 
​​Security is especially important in the infrastructure of neighboring 
countries. The Csoigonridnignsation of work dealing with cyber threats. In 
practice, in order to strengthen even more.
SSttrraatteeggyy  33  AAnndd  pprrootteecctt  tthhee  iinntteerreessttss  ooff  nnaattiioonnaall  sseeccuurriittyy..  TThhrreeaattss  aaggaaiinnsstt  
the old style and new style.
goal
1. Analysis of the modern cyber threats that cover the 
surrounding continuous and accurate order. Users benefit
Decisions, policies and practices.
2. The armed forces and security agencies involved are ready. 
CCoommbbaatt  ccyybbeerr  tthhrreeaattss  iinn  bbootthh  ttrraaddiittiioonnaall  aanndd  nneeww  ffoorrmmss  ooff  tthhrreeaattss..  33..  
When the plan faces a threat of cyber crisis. National cyber war or cyber.
Office within the National Security bru2sh7ed against.   Indicators 
1. The amount of security agencies involved in the policies / 
strategies / plans to cope with cyber threats Tulsa.  Toast the disaster 
Old style and new style disaster. 
2. Update Frequency Analysis Condemned the threats 
Cyber-to-date compared to the freqUuesnecrsy .in the exchange of information and results.
analyze 
3. Provide training plan faces a threat of cyber disruptions. 
National crisis, cyber war or cyber. The focus on joint training
During the military units involved
Guidelines for action
3.1 follow-up study and analyze the situation a threat. Cyber 
​​involved regularly. The threats in the old style and new style.
To identify trends and possible benefits. National security 
will be affected and to find ways to prevent the incident. Or reduce 
damage to a minimum as possible.
3.2 unit for security in respect of the need to consider and 
factors such as policy / strategy. To cope with cyber threats and 
management. Manage data retention Prevent attacks or hacking Using 
For cyber conflict Including assessment and review Policy / strategy 
encompasses modernization.
28 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  3.3 defines the role of the army in charge of the defense. 
Country in terms of cyber security and support. Cyber ​​security has been 
assigned by the government. Especially when National cyber crisis 
situations or cyberwarfare.
SSttrraatteeggyy  44  SSttrreennggtthheenniinngg  tthhee  ddiiggiittaall  eeccoonnoommyy
goal 
1. Thailand's transition to  Users seamless digital economy
And sustainable
2. The use of digital technology more widespread in the private 
sector 3. Strategy / planning. The rules are effective, appropriate 
digital economy standards. And private sector participation
Indicators
1. Number of companies / businesses that use digital technology 
2. Prepare a strategy / plan / plan / regulation. Consistent support the 
digital economy
Guidelines for action
4.1 Promote the development capabilities or operations. To 
support the transition to. Users smooth, well-balanced digital economy 
Quality and lead  Users sustainable digital economy
Office within the National Security bru2sh9ed against.   4.2 supports the participation of the private sector in the 
promotion. Digital economy with theI ngcorvTeeharesn emtesec tnhhtne io nl othgey  uesuerodz foonr ed.igital operations.
BusinessU usneitr s and promote the use of digital technology broadly.    
4.3 Develop strategies adjusted Lahore. The plan or plans 
As well as legal regulations Appropriate and facilitate compliance. The 
Digital Economy Along with the evaluation and review regularly. By 
focusing on the participation of the private sector in the process of 
preparing the strategy. Such a plan or plans
Strategic issues ppaarrtt  55  RRaaiissee  aawwaarreenneessss  aanndd  pprroommoottee  ccooooppeerraattiioonn..
Domestic and maintaining profitabilitAyt.  constant cyber security  
goal 
1. the general public at all levels All ages and genders are 
Internet users. Are aware of cyber threats. And knowledge of the 
treatment. Cyber ​​security
2. State the private sector and civil society work together to 
maintain. Cyber ​​security
3. Channel / communication mechanism into tSheig gnuifiicdaenlint eosp.e rations in the region
Private sector and civil society
30 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  Indicators
1. Preparation GKunidoew ledge at handO n this side and cyber.
Evaluation
2. Amount CruTtcohaesrt the publicity through various media / mechanism. 
mmoorree          33..  TThhee  ttrraaiinniinngg  pprroovviiddeess  kknnoowwlleeddggee..  
The public undTehrtea kuinseg  of the Internet and
Evaluation  
Guidelines for action
5.1 Promote the dissemination of information to all 
stakeholders. Everywhere, through the mechanisms of public, private and 
academic sectors to raise awareness of cyber threats and importance. Of 
cyber security. The use of digital technology And the activities of cyber 
safety and benefits. And promoting cooperation on cyber security. 
Included in the group.
Increases in both the corporate and individual level.
5.2 Promote cooperation with research institutes and 
educational institutions such as universities and brains. In the exchange tohfe knowledge
Joint research and / or presentation of research and preparation guidemso. bile Users
Dissemination oTfh kisn oinwvloeldvgees  the cyber
5.3 Promote and develop the field of security. Cyber 
​​security in the education system since the basic common line.
Office within the National Security bru3sh1ed against. The content of the curriculum and vocational education is different in 
each. Education
5.4 WhTyhe Ahat ltlhe the holTeoGhfe etnh weer oarlkE  ducation oTfh ceo nstfaidteicn-fcrSeewe ibmemveinragge
Cyber ​​older people  The general use of the Itnhtee renldeet rWly omen and children
Youth in cooperation with local community schools. Administration Local 
and agencies Related to disseminate knowledge And the creation of
Recognizing a systematic and ongoing. 
5.5 Promote cooperation and coordination between the state 
and private sectors. Property sharp and civil constructions in order to 
discuss security and Cyber-free beverage Lahore on holistic manner has 
been strengthened. By providing a mechanism at the Beach, and the 
communSicigantioifinc abnett wpreiveant eth seemc tionr  oarndde rcS tiivogi lnu sinfoidcceaiernsttyt ap tnroad.c  tthicea lp ionlvicoylv oefm theen ts otaf tteh eto s.ector.
Private sector and civil society to reflect on the issue. Evaluate 
Performance Policies and policy recommendations As well as support 
anTdh ae  cjaollienrt. cyber security. 
SSttrraatteeggyy  66  TToo  pprroommoottee  aa  ccuullttuurree  ooff  ccyybbeerrssppaaccee..  OOnn  tthhee  rriigghhtt
goal   
1. Provide a mechanism to instill good in cyberspace. To the 
right And respect the rights and fundamental freedoms of persons. the other 
Encompasses 
32 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  2. To further promote the networTk.h e user interface to help take care of the net. 
Using cyberspace to the right.
3. Learning  Especially among children and youth. 
the hTohlee  only part of the metal and a heavy portion attributable 
transaction Gus's Pat Cook's threats affecting the system's security of cyberspace.
Indicators     
1. The project "Cyberspace Watch" in several community 
projects such as local institutions.
2. Training Network.  The use of the Internet In coordination
Cooperation in the care and instill to the use of cyberspace. On the right
Guidelines for action
6.1 Promote values ​​the good of the world.  by
Promote the use of information and communications technology to the 
public. The glacier, which is the state religion and monarchy.
6.2 WhTyhe thhaeUl lOsivnagl culture cyber MySpaWceit hh athse GLibEkeeNa tEth Re AL
And to the conscienTchee.  others and society as a whole Respect for 
fundamental freedoms and encompasses not violate the law.
Office within the National Security bru3sh3ed against. SSttrraatteeggyy  77  PPrroommoottee  tthhee  pprreevveennttiioonn  aanndd  ssuupppprreessssiioonn  ooff  ccrriimmee..          
goal 
1. Personnel Investigation and jobs with higher capacities 2. The 
authorities of Thailand have more modern technology to help. 
Investigation and News
Indicators 
1. training / development of cyber capabilities. The 
investigations and news
2. Program / Project technology. For modern-day job
Investigation and News
Guidelines for action 
7.1 enhance and define the role of the caTllehre.  law enforcement 
Wwrhigiachsht   ReTgheen dsubtuyr gpolice andT Rheeg apetan tDgshebeSurIg o. fficials
Our nthites The ageCntcohineec sdeaIrnnta itnhge  medTiahe Cyber ​​Park In osthereda erdcri hgto it aTlhutheni sd earctaTtiokahinfeno gre mentioned knife
tthhee  ssaannccttiioonnss  77..22  PPrroommoottee  ccaappaacciittyy  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  ppeerrssoonnnneell..  
Investigation and News As well as promoting the use of modern 
technology to help. The investigations and news
34 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.  7.3 WhTyhe Thahlel moDdeevrneilzoepderT jhoeb sn neeww csybeDrsop tehces Thheo lew rong 
TToo  eeffffeeccttiivveellyy  mmaannaaggee  ccyybbeerr  tthhrreeaattss  vveerryy  ttiimmeellyy..  77..44  PPrroommoottee  
cooperation on information exchange. As well as experiences and 
best practices. Users with the international level. 
Bilateral and international organizations such as the police, the Interpol to 
develop the capacity to prevent and suppress crimes of Thailand, 
particularly useful in the investigation and the news.
7.5 Promote and support the development of regulations 
and laws related to preventing and combating cyber crime.
SSttrraatteeggyy  88  PPrroommoottiioonnaall  rroollee   At the initiative of Thailand
Cooperation for cyber security in the region. international  
goal 
1. Thailand has a constructive role in the development of 
standards and norms or pushing for the creation of a trust or confidence 
in. Shared use of cyberspace. Both regional and international levels.
2. The exchangJoehn Otnhge holrAeenadc ttohre lineP ractSicMe Cg ooovde rGseoaas .
Continuous    
Office within the National Security bru3sh5ed against.   Indicators
1. The International Conference on norms and standards for 
building trust in cyberspace.
2. Create The toBoE ltshldeo nThe confidTehnec set aotfic-frae ec ybbeevrerAathtg ebe olethv eltshe
mCoitRuynetgaiionn al and international levels
Guidelines for action
8.1 encouraged to use Cyberspace in a peaceful way. by
Using information technology to create conflict. As well as cooperation 
With friendly countries in opposing the use of information technology to 
support. Transnational crimes or actions that damage.
8.2 supports the exchange of knowledge, information and 
best practices with cyber abroad. Both at the bilateral, regional and 
multilateral levels.
8.3 communication channels to exchange information and 
ideas. Foster understanding of international cooperation in responding to 
and coping. Cyber ​​security situation.
8.4 has been active in promoting dialogue on norms, 
standards and measures tToh cer esaetlee.cTterudst orA credit JoThhno mas Fdourreiniggn 
In the cyber dimension Includes a common regional position. The norms 
It is recognized internationally and reflects the interests and Thailand. 
Countries in the region
-----------------------------------------------------
36 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.Factors of success
1. GEGNEovReArnLmtheen Pt toosGtuitsmo's pG oerntaenrta El dMuoctaotriso.n oTfh ceo sntfaidtiecn-fcraee ec ybbeevrerage
National and pushing for concrete results seriously. 
2. The agency's guidelines are based on a treatment strategy. 
National cyber security practices and preparation. The security plan
CCyybbeerr  ​​s​​seeccuurriittyy  aaggeennccyy  iittsseellff..  AAnndd  ffoollllooww  tthhee  ppllaann  sseerriioouussllyy..  33..  AAllll  
stakeholders, both public and private sector. Cooperate and participate 
in creating awareness. This story treatment
Cyber ​​security
4. JusAtin ranTghee o rfeview asseTshsee dresuTltshth eoe fo orifgfsine aosf oTnim scienE2cv eyeerya rs
-------------------------------------------------------
Office within the National Security bru3sh7ed against. 38 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.The table synchronization The 
association's mission and 
strategic plan, the main 
policy-related. Strategic Security 
NATIONAL cyber security from 
2560 to 2564.1  Insert Table Clock SynchronizationThe mission of the association policy, strategic masterplan involved.  Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 2564. The 20-year national strategy (AD 2560-2579)The 20-year national strategy (AD 2560-2579) Security strategy: 5. Develop mechanisms and measures for international cooperation at all levels. To prevent and tackle transnational threats. Reduce the impact of the terrorist Security strategy: 5. Develop mechanisms and measures for international cooperation at all levels. To prevent and tackle transnational threats. Reduce the impact of the terrorist  threat. And strengthen the development of information technology and cyber-6 and empowering force. The restructuring Capacity and Soyuz Expo Lahore cover for developing intelligence for the  ultimate spin shots. And cooperation with neighboring countries. Policy and national plan on National Security (AD 2560-2564).Policy and national plan on National Security (AD 2560-2564). ได้ระบุให้ภัยคุกคามทางไซเบอร์เป็นหนึ่งในภัยคุกคามความมั่นคงโดยก าหนดแนวทาง ไว้ในประเด็นที่ ๓.๗.๑๕  ได้ระบุให้ภัยคุกคามทางไซเบอร์เป็นหนึ่งในภัยคุกคามความมั่นคงโดยก าหนดแนวทาง ไว้ในประเด็นที่ ๓.๗.๑๕  การป้องกันและแก้ไขปัญหาความมั่นคงทางไซเบอร์ ได้ก าหนดเป้าหมายเชิงยุทปศาสตร์ คือ Thailand, a country of security and availability. Dealing with cyber threats and strategies of sites in terms of 1) the  development Rasheed ability both government and the military, civilians and the police and various sectors in the country to prevent and resolve security in cyberspace. Supports digital society, 2)  develop a framework for international cooperation. ASEAN and to prevent and tackle cyber security, 3) human resources development, knowledge and awareness of the important keys of the cyber  the4) protection against cyber threats. Email and cybersecurity threat.   collaborateStrengthen cyber security Abu Rsa by the management of cyber security among government agencies. And strengthen the network of joint rest. With all sectors, both inside and outside the country, 5)  cyberthe development of legislation and regulations to cyber security. Including the development of technology For the investigation and prevention of crime, who left No. 6) promote capacity development  of all sectors / personnel involved to help educate the pension Cyber ​​continued. *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thomasthe based strategy Keeping ThomasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Office within the National Security bru4sh1ed against. 2  National Economic and Social Development Plan No. 12. Strategy 5 Strengthening the national security of the country to prosperity and sustainable development. The goal is Thailand is ready to tackle the threat of military Strategy 5 Strengthening the national security of the country to prosperity and sustainable development. The goal is Thailand is ready to tackle the threat of military  threats and other threats.   Strategy 7 The development of infrastructure and logistics. The development plan is to improve telecommunications infrastructure. Across the country and has the ultimate visual spin Strategy 7 The development of infrastructure and logistics. The development plan is to improve telecommunications infrastructure. Across the country and has the ultimate visual spin  promote the use of digital technology to add value to the business Pur. Promoting innovation, research and development of space technology and digital industries of Thailand to develop the  knowledge and skills of its people. And to strengthen cyber security.   Plans to develop a digital economy and society. The Soyuz-3 science society equally Cus pictures with digital technology. Create a digital society Cus image (digital society) for the use of digital technology. creatively By all people have  the awareness, knowledge, understanding, skills in using digital technology to benefit and creative (Digital Literacy). The purpose PageThe Soyuz scientific development capacity of 5 people ready to enter the era of digital economy and society. Create and develop those operations to be able to. And creative  use of digital technologies in a smarter career. Including the development of digital technology skills in the private sector, public sector employees and self-employed in the field. Digital and  direct all professions. The knowledge and expertise to meet international standards. The Soyuz sciences 6 builds confidence in the user. digital technology Our focus is to establish security. And confidence in the service. The Pur dentistry with digital technology to  entrepreneurs who operate and service users. Which is regarded as the fundamentals that helped drive the country into an era of digital economy. And the role of government in the North. Facilitate To  all sectors of the mission of the Soyuz extremely important to this science. It covers standards (standard), protection of privacy and personal data (privacy) and security (cyber security). Lahore on January 24, 2561  *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thomasthe based strategy Keeping ThomasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
42 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.y. 
et
3  Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security. the criticism The 2560-2 564Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security. the criticism The 2560-2 564Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security. the criticism The 2560-2 564Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security. the criticism The 2560-2 564 authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  1.1 The policy of the The importance of cyber security support to n n By Prof. *    In the - Draft National Strategy 20-year period (AD 2560-2579). define the policy to maintain stability. cyber securityspot. *  - National Security Policy of NSC Sector 2558 to 2564.  1.2 Development of organizational structures in the public sector. To support By Prof. In the -National Economic and Social  spot. Sector Development Plan No. 12.  the digital society and Combat cyber threats To strengthen the trust of the  various sectors to liaise with the state.-Plans to develop a digital economy and soci -Developing action plans to drive revenue.  1.3 Promote the use of digital technology and Internet services. The government By Prof.   In the Strategic development plan for the digital  agency Public relations and thousands of sites Proactive people Get informed spot. Dollar. economy and social 5-year period (AD  and confident in using the services of state agencies.2560-2564).   1.4 encourage government transparency. Using technology and cyber By Prof.  In the  activities undertaken by. The ultimate protection principles into account the spot. Dollar.  spin and freedom. As well as the privacy of the users of online government services. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
strategic 1. Strengthen confidence and. Trust i1. Strengthen confidence and. Trust i all sectors to conduct activities  encompasses all forms. *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thothe based strategy Keeping Tho
Office within the National Security bru4sh3ed against. s 
4  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  1.5 build the confidence and trust placed in me over the other parts of the By Prof.   In the  spot. Dollar. public sector. The opportunity and supply channels to the public. To engage  with government agencies to develop and improve the technology and  conduct cyber activist. To meet the needs of the clients. 1.6 Promoting the private sector in various fields at all levels Pur business By Prof.   In the  spot. Dollar. operations Pur works using digital technology. Internet and cyberspace  broad. And standards The sites of public relations and proactive cooperation  from the private sector. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
44 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.y. 
et
5  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic strategicGuidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  2. Infrastructure protection and 2. Infrastructure protection and 2.1 preparing the policy framework for cyber security for the protection of the By Prof.  In the spot. - Draft National Strategy 20-year period (AD 2560-2579).  information important to the basic frame creates the important information and review. Evaluation of the SUT. NSC c.  National Security Policy of 2558 to 2564. development. The combat cyber threats.-Implement policies to improve policies to keep pace. Lahore with the situation A private  changes.dollars. Sp. -National Economic and Social Armaments. Development Plan No. 12.   PACC. -Plans to develop a digital economy and soci AMLO. Financial institutions.  -Developing action plans to drive revenue.  In the Factors to consider and the Unit did the job.Strategic development plan for the digital 2.2 Rsa pin from Pendleton held the central unit has the security. Cyber By Prof.  spot. economy and social 5-year period (AD ​​security at the national level to Act as the central policy level. Directly to the  NSC 2560-2564).  Prime Minister The data-centric security. cyber security And coordinated Feb c. action In terms of coordination, surveillance, counter cyber threats, managed Dollar.  to raise awareness and cooperation, both at home and abroad as well. NBTC.  Promote the development of capabilities in tackling cyber threats. Agencies  The pin may Rsa's established practice up support. Appropriate   *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thomasthe based strategy Keeping ThomasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Office within the National Security bru4sh5ed against. s 
6  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  2.3 The transaction infrastructure. All of the important information. Public the Ice In the spot.  and private sectors with Reordering the importance attributed to the NSC c.  preparation of action plans and emergency response plans.Dollar.  NBTC.  PACC. Private.  2.4 Define roles and responsibilities of the various agencies of the state in the By Prof. In the  field. Protect the infrastructure by The importance of information Dealing with spot.  threats In normal times, the cyber security incident recovery and Financial  reconstruction after the incident. The remedy effects. Including a mechanism institutions dollars. NSC.  for cooperation. The private sector and other stakeholders to protect the  information infrastructure, the importance of cyber threats from Thailand. 2.5 Promote the preparation The plans cover infrastructure, the importance of By Prof. In the spot. PACC.  information in both the public and private sectors. To each organizational AMLO.  principles Protect the infrastructure by Important information to the agency's own. The private  The potential of the first Rsi and in situations that raise or Lahore. The sector  financial institutions. emergency Beyond the capabilities of units It can synchronize Support for  up-gaming situations. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
46 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.s 
7  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  2.6 Promote management training to deal with cyber threats in the By Prof. In the spot.  country to prepare to tackle cyber place in various forms, including in  crisis.  2.7 Draft and revise the law Regulations and other requirements to the chest By Prof. In the spot.  and on the framework for cyber security by Rsa Pinter's screenplay requires Moss. Really. C a.  protection and appropriate sanctions.   2.8 Development of personnel in the public sector through education and training By Prof. On the  in various forms, promote the transfer of knowledge within the government or spot.  between the government resources with private standards as well as to Africa. The  Key to the development of the positions in the public sector that support the waiting. The Professor. Sector  growth of medical personnel. Appropriate cyber security In order to maintain staff  The field of cyber security in the bureaucracy. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
Office within the National Security bru4sh7ed against. s 
8  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  2.9 Development of research and development in the field of security. Cyber By Prof. On the  spot. ​​security The government has a role. The research and development As well as  The Professor. BS. cooperation with the private sector and abroad to be able to access keys sources  of technology, much of the silver Capital and Market Development, for General  Motors Co. industrial, security, cyber security and lead to a reduction in the  dependence of. abroad 2.10 promote the participation of the private sector to treat By Prof. On the  seriously. Cyber ​​security Both in terms of cognitive development spot. The  and technology development. Security to raise the capacity of the Professor.  country's cyber security holistically.BS. Private.  2:11 develop standards and urged a review mechanism to assess. By Prof. In the spot.  Cyber ​​security standards in the whole of the country.   masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
48 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564. .tsniaga de9h4surb ytiruceS lanoitaN eht nihtiw eciffO
*
Tulsa thethis the based strategy Kthe based strategy K strategic
eeping Thomeeping Thom
asasS
RGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the  more.      service. The works deal with the threat. Cyber ​​practical to be strengthened even  especially in infrastructure, the importance of the country to a synchronization  Luxembourg ษsa the operations center coordinate cyber security, or CERT,  2.12 encourage the North With the deployment of technical measures in By Prof. In the spot.  the core secondary policy masterplan.DealingsGuidelines for operation Links to relevant strategic authorities responsible  9 
 10  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic strategicGuidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  3. Protecting the interests and 3. Protecting the interests and 3.1 monitored and analyzed the situation Lahore cyber threats associated with By Prof. In the spot. - Draft National Strategy 20-year period (AD 2560-2579).  confidence of the nation continues to NSC Mod. the Corps always a threat in the old style and new style trends to determine the  National Security Policy of 2558 to 2564. escape from the threat Pat old style and new style.-NIA spot. feasibility and benefits. National security will be affected and to find ways to  CAT May. prevent them. Because of damage to or lower than most. Bk.tt.  In the spot. 3.2 unit for stability. Related Pittsburgh Public Rsa prepared policy / The By Prof.  NSC Mod. Soyuz science to deal with cyber threats and management. Data Retention  NIA spot. Prevent attacks or hacking The use of cyber conflict, as well as speeding the  CAT May. evaluation and review of gaming situations. Policy / Soyuz encompasses the  Bk.tt. science to date. Agencies 3.3 determine the role of the army in charge of the defense. Dimensional cyber MoD.  under the MoD. security and cyber security support when it was commissioned by the  governments, especially when it occurs. Lahore crisis situations, cyber warfare,  Commentscyber or national level. *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thomasthe based strategy Keeping ThomasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
50 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.y. 
et
11  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  4.1 Promote the development of the capacity or speed. Operation Support By Prof. Comp. -National Economic and Social  Development Plan No. 12.  The transition to the digital economy in a balanced and smooth with Cus On the  lead to sustainable digital economy.-Plans to develop a digital economy and socispot.  NESDB. Private. -Developing action plans to drive revenue.  Strategic development plan for the digital  economy and social 5-year period (AD  4.2 supports the participation of the private sector in boosting the economy. By Prof. Comp. 2560-2564).   Digital government In both groups, those who use digital technology to On the spot.  speed. Pur business operations and promote the use of digital technology is already broadly.The private sector.  4.3 Soyuz improve the science. The plan or plans, as well as laws, By Prof. Comp.  regulations, practices and contributing to the consistency. The emerging On the  digital economy Along with the evaluation and review of the Corps, always spot.  with an emphasis on the participation of the private sector in the preparation Moss.  of the Soyuz health plans or plans for such.Really. Private.  masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
strategic 4. Strengthening the digital economy4. Strengthening the digital economy *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thothe based strategy Keeping Tho
Office within the National Security bru5sh1ed against. y. 
et
12  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  5.1 Promote the dissemination of information to all stakeholders by By Prof. In the spot.  MOE.thoroughly. Through the mechanisms of public, private and academic SUT. ERA.  sectors to raise awareness of cyber threats and the importance of cyber BS. The DPW Burma.  security. The use of digital technology and cyber operations activity, safety,  and benefit and promote cooperation on cyber security in the form of  bundles. Both individuals and organizationsNational Security Policy of 2558 to 2564. - -National Economic and Social 5.2 To further promote the collaboration with the Swiss Institute of Education By Prof. On the Development Plan No. 12. research and educational institutions, such as universities and brains. In the spot. The Professor. BS. -Plans to develop a digital economy and socifield of research, knowledge sharing, and / or function. The proposed  research and the preparation of manuals dissemination of knowledge related to the cyber. 5.3 Promote and develop the field of security. Cyber ​​based education system By Prof. In the spot. Since year.  ranging from basic to both general and vocational content of the main square, BS.  there are differences in the way each level of education. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
strategic 5. Raise awareness and 5. Raise awareness and  promote Cooperation within  the Cyber ​​security *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thothe based strategy Keeping Tho
52 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.s 
13  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  5.4 Promote Awareness of the security. Cyber ​​older people Internet users in By Prof. On the spot.  The general, the elderly, children, women, youth and local communities by  Professor. BS. Bangkok SUT.  partnering with educational institutions. Administration Local authorities and  relevant agencies to share knowledge and build. Recognizing a systematic and  ongoing. 5.5 Promote cooperation and coordination between the State and the private By Prof. In the spot.  SUT. Private. sector. Civil Society for cyber security in the ษsa Luxembourg. Total has  Since fighting. strengthened By providing mechanisms and channels of communication  between. Well, for the sake of The understanding of the policy of the state to  the private sector. And civil society into action. The participation of the private  sector. Civil society to reflect on the issue. Evaluation of conduct, policies and  proposed policies. As well as the support and co. Cyber ​​security   masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
Office within the National Security bru5sh3ed against. y. 
et
authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic  policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  By Prof. In the spot. - Draft National Strategy 20-year period (AD 2560-2579). SUT. Burma.  - National Security Policy of Since 2558 to 2564. fighting.  Really. Sq. The relevant authorities. -National Economic and Social  Development Plan No. 12.  -Plans to develop a digital economy and soci -Developing action plans to drive revenue.  Development of a strategic plan to digitally By Prof. In the spot.  Social and economic 5-year period (AD SUT. Burma.  2560-2564).  Since fighting.  Really. Sq. Units involved.  main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
14  Guidelines for operation  6.1 Promote values ​​the good of the world.  By promotion Information technology and communication to the public for the application  preserves the nation, religion and monarchy.  6.2 Promote the culture minister global cyberspace with responsibility and  awareness of others and society as a whole. Ping ultimate respect  fundamental freedoms and encompasses not violate the law. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the 
strategic 6. To continue using the hall culture. 6. To continue using the hall culture.  Cyberspace in the proper way. *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thothe based strategy Keeping Tho
54 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.y. 
15  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic strategicGuidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealings the core secondary  - Draft National Strategy 20-year period (AD 2560-2579). Promotion and Protection Promotion and Protection 7.1 enhance and define the role of law enforcement officials, including police police. CAT's.  me- National Security Policy of Really. NIA and officials of the Department of Special Investigation. and staff Or agencies 2558 to 2564. Angeles. Involved in the investigation of cyber To search for those guilty to justice act. Units -National Economic and Social  involved in Development Plan No. 12.   the process -Plans to develop a digital economy and societ to terminate -Master Plan for the Administration of Justice  PACC NCCan umbrella Act of 2558 to 2561.  like AMLO.  PACC. NACC. Office cabinet global court settlement.   7.2 Promote the development capabilities of personnel in investigations and police. CAT May.  AMLO. NIA. news, as well as promoting the use of modern technology to help in the task.  Investigation and News 7.3 Promote the development of cyber journalism is a global program to police. CAT May.  increase efficiency at Bing image of Lakewood Pat Cook's Cyber ​​Threat Do AMLO. NIA click.  not the Dormition stump situations Lahore.  Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thomasthe based strategy Keeping ThomasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
7. 7.  cri *
Office within the National Security bru5sh5ed against. s 
16  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  NIA 7.4 Promote cooperation on information exchange, as well as gaming police.  experience and best practices with other countries. Both bilateral and With  relevant international organizations such as the International Development  Research survey capabilities for the prevention and suppression of crime,  especially in Thailand, the investigation and the news. 7.5 Promote and support the development of regulations. And laws On police. NIA  preventing and combating cyber crime.CAT May.  - a 20-year national strategy. (AD - a 20-year national strategy. (AD 8.1 supports the use of cyberspace in a peaceful way. Without technology By Prof. Mod. Click. 2560-2579)  On the Information controversy As well as partnerships with friendly countries in North  - National Security Policy of spot. NSC America, but the use of information technology in order. Support the cause 2558 to 2564. sq. NIA. Transnational crimes or acts. The damage -National Economic and Social  By Prof. Mod. Click. Development Plan No. 12.  8.2 supports the exchange of information, knowledge and best practices.  Cyber ​​International The bilateral Regional and multilateralOn the  spot. NSC.  masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
strategic 8. Promote the constructive role of 8. Promote the constructive role of  Thailand in cooperation to maintain.  Cyber ​​security level Regional and  international levels   *Tulsa thethis the based strategy Keeping Thothe based strategy Keeping Tho
56 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.s 
17  authorities responsible Links to relevant strategic Guidelines for operation policy masterplan.Dealingthe core secondary  8.3 communication channels to exchange information and best practices By Prof. Click.  In the spot. clear. In cooperation with other countries to counter and cope with situations  Lahore. Cyber ​​security 8.4 has been active in promoting dialogue on norms, standards, measures to By Prof. Click.  build trust between the countries in the cyber dimension includes a common In the spot.  regional position. To international norms Is unacceptable and reflects the  interests of Thailand and countries in the region. masmasSRGB will ensure secureA national cyber-Nice the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.the Robotology. And the Athos. Into the main unit and units. Vice agencies until the morning.Toast the new central unit for such duties.at the 
Keeping ThoKeeping Tho
strategic Tulsa thethis the based strategy the based strategy 
*
Office within the National Security bru5sh7ed against. Contents List of Abbreviations agencies.
acronym   description
Click.  State Department
Bangkok.  Bangkok
Public Relations Department P ublic Relations Department
Feb.  The Office of the Civil Service Commission
Sector  Commission development.
NBTC.  Broadcasting Commission Broadcasting And 
the National Telecommunications
CAT May.  Department of Special Investigation
MoD.  Ministry of Defense
C.  Ministry of Transport
By Prof.  Minister for Digital Economy and Society
police.   The Office of the National Police.
BOT.  Bank of Thailand
Bk.tt.  Garrison Thailand
AMLO.  The Office of the Anti-Money Laundering.
NCCC  Committee Against National 
Fraud
PACC  Commission Against Corruption in 
the public sector
58 Strategic Security National Cyber ​​Security Act of 2560 to 
2564.acronym   description
Spot.  Crime Suppression Division. About the 
Technology Crime The Office of the 
National Police.
As of May.  Ministry of Commerce
Armaments.  Ministry of Energy
Burma.  Ministry of Social Development and Human Security
SUT.  Ministry of the Interior
Public Works Department  Department of Justice
BS.  Ministy of Science and Tecnology 
MOE.  Ministry of Education
NIA  Office of National Intelligence
C. a.  The Council of State
TBA.  Ministry of Public Health
Office judiciary   The Office of Justice
ETDA.  The Office of Electronic Transactions 
(ITD)
NSC  The Office of the National Security Council.
Dollar.  The Office of Electronic Government (ITD)
NESDB.  Commission and Economic Development. 
National Society
TX.   The Office of the Attorney General
Office within the National Security brus5h9ed against.   The Office of the National Security Council. 
No. 1 The Government Phitsanulok 
Road, Dusit, Bangkok 10300.
First published June 2561
Amount Type  5,000 copies
Copyright Office of Security Strategy on transnational threats. The 
Office of the National Security Council.
Art and design htohlee mmTh  MMulsse..  KKaann  pprriinntt  fflluueennttllyy  pprreeaacchh  
Print  Office of the Minister and the Government 
Printing Samsen Road, Dusit, Bangkok 10300 
Tel: 0 2243 0613 Fax 0 2243 1820.NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY 
2017-2021