 REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIANATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY2018 -2022

 ContentsExecutive summary
 ......................................................................................................................... 1 Introduction
 ....................................................................................................................................... 3 Cyber trends, challenges and threats
 ........................................................................................ 6 Cyber security principles
 ................................................................................................................ 12 Effective and efficient cyber security capacities
 .................................................................. 12 Protection and prevention
 ......................................................................................................... 12 Security for economic development
 ........................................................................................ 12 Trust and availability
 .................................................................................................................. 13 Legal security
 ................................................................................................................................ 14 Stakeholders
 .................................................................................................................................... 15 Vision and mission
 ......................................................................................................................... 16 Goals
 ................................................................................................................................................... 17 GOAL 1: Cyber Resilience
 ......................................................................................................... 18 GOAL 2: Cyber capacities and cyber security culture
 .......................................................... 20 GOAL 3: Combating cyber crime
 ........................................................................................... 22 GOAL 4: Cyber defence
 ............................................................................................................. 24 GOAL 5: Cooperation and exchange of information
 ....................................................... 26 Implementation
 .............................................................................................................................. 29 National CyberSecurity Council
 ........................................................................................... 29 Body
 with operational cyber security capacities
 ............................................................. 30 Implementation risks
 .................................................................................................................. 31 APPENDIX 1
 ...................................................................................................................................... 33 Definitions
 .................................................................................................................................... 33 APPENDIX 2
 ..................................................................................................................................... 37 Acronyms
 ...................................................................................................................................... 37 

 Document administrationVersionDateNotes1.011.06.2018First draft1.103.07.2018Mature draft version, with implemented comments and suggestions from all stakeholders1.217 July 2018Final version, adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia
 Participants in document preparation: Dimitar MancevMinistry of Information Society and Administration Solza KovachevskaMinistry of Information Society and AdministrationAna MalcevaMinistry of Information Society and AdministrationMarjan StoilkovskiMinistry of InteriorNatalija VeljanoskaMinistry of InteriorJane StojanovMinistry of InteriorAlenka GorgievaMinistry of DefenceMitko BogdanoskiMinistry of DefenceFilip StojkovskiMinistry of DefenceOrhan IsmailiMinistry of DefenceJovana GjorgjioskaMinistry of Information Society and AdministrationElena MancevaMinistry of Information Society and Administration

 
1 
 Executive summaryStrengthening the national capacities for cyber threat management and improving the cyber security have become a priorityfor the Republic of Macedonia.The National Cyber Security Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia is a strategic document that fosters the development of safe, secure, reliableand resilientdigital environment, supported by high-quality capacities, based on cooperation and trust in the field of cyber security. This document is organized in seven parts. The first sectionintroducesthetopic, focusing onthe increased dependency on cyber space services, the increased use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and the negative influence of severe cyber threats on the functioning of the public and private sectors. This section emphasises the need for the existence of strategic documents in order tostrengthenthe national cyber security capacities.In the second section,the Strategy examines the majorcyber trends, challenges and threats that are key in relation to the cyber space of the Republic ofMacedonia.Sectionthree lays down the cyber security principles that support the Strategy:
 Effective and efficient cyber security capacities
 Protection and prevention
 Security for economic development
 Trust and availability
 Legal securitySectionfourdefinesthe stakeholdersin the fieldof cyber security in the country: public sector, private sector, academic community, citizens and civil society organizations.The fifth sectionstates the vision and mission of the national Strategy.Section sixgoes on to set up the “5C”Goalsof the National Cyber Security Strategy. The objectives of the five goals are focused on: 1.
 Building a cyberresilient ICT infrastructure, identifyingand implementingadequate solutions in order to protect the national interests2.
 Promotinga cyber securityculture, in order to raise the public awareness and understanding of cyber threats, as well as building and advancing the necessary capacities for protection.3.
 Strengtheningthe nationalcapacities for prevention, research and adequate response to cyber crime.4.
 Strengtheningthecapacities for defence of national interests and reducingcurrent and potentialcyber space risks.

 
2 
 5.
 Cooperation and exchange of informationon national and international level.Section sevenis devoted to the generalization of an Action Plan for the implementationof the National Cyber Security Strategy, along withthe challenges for successful implementation. It highlights the responsibilities of authorities defined in the Strategy regardingthe support of the goals and activities outlined in this document. In addition, this section establishes the organisational structure for coordination of the development and implementation of the course of actions defined in the Strategy and the Action Plan. In this manner, aNational Cyber Security Councilanda Body with operational cyber security capacitiesare described below, along with their jurisdiction and activities. The measures and activities for the implementationof the goals set in this Strategy will be outlined in the Action Plan, developed within three months after the adoption of the Strategyby the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The National Cyber Security Strategy is based on the principles of the Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union and the NATO Cyber Defence Pledge.

 
3 
 IntroductionThepast years marked a growing and consistentuse of Information andCommunication Technologies (ICT), which representsacore driver of globalization, thus providingsubstantial contribution in the process of improving the economicdevelopment, standard of life and societal well-being.Fast progressof ICT provides significant contribution for improvementand development of the Macedonian civil society. Stakeholders from the political, social andeconomic life in the Republic of Macedonia consistently utilizethe opportunities offered by the great expansion of ICT. According to global indexes indicating the level of development of Information Society (such as IDI, NRI, e-GDI, GCI), the Republic of Macedonia is in the first statistical quarter. In this manner, the Ministry of Information Society and Administration and other governinginstitutions consistently introducenew electronic services with the purpose ofsimplifying the dailylivesof thecitizens.Nevertheless, increased dependency on cyber space services demonstrates howdysfunctional ICTsystems and severecyber threats may have significant negative influence on the day-to-dayoperationsofthe public and private sector, as well as the society as a whole. Dependency on new technologies and the need forgreater availability of services in the cyber space is a major driverfor users and institutions to raise awareness ofthe importance of integrity, authenticity and confidentiality of the data. Macedonian communication networks are part of the global communication networks, which impliesthat cyber security incidents on other locationsmayofteninfluence the Macedonian cyber space and services, and vice versa. Analysis made by the most relevant institutions worldwide in thefield of security and defence show that over the past years,cyber threats indisputablyrepresent some of the most significant security risksfor societies nowadays.Hence, cyber threatsshould be treated as an integral part of the national and international security. 

 
4 
 Due to the reasons stated above, strengthening the national capacities for managing cyber threatsand increasing the cybersecurity has become one of the key challenges for the Republic of Macedonia. In the efforts to strengthen the national cyber security capacities, the existence of strategic documents related to this challenge is of crucial importance.In this manner, the NationalCyber Security Strategy will primarilyprovide the basis for improvement of the frameworkconditionsin thisarea. The need for developing and implementing a National Cyber Security Strategy is predominantly related to:1.
 Activities, social interactions, economy, as well as basic human rights and freedom at large depend on ICT usage; hence, it is necessary to ensure the existence ofan open, safe and secure cyberspace;2.
 The use of ICT systems increases the risk of cyber incidents and abuse, which categorizesthem assome of the major threats for the national security;3.
 Definitionand development of a cyber defencepolicy;4.
 Establishing an integrated, multidisciplinary approach to secure closer cooperation and coordination between the defence and security sector, the institutions involved in the fight against cyber-crime, the private sector, civil society organizationsand other relevant stakeholders;5.
 Strengthening the operational capacity, as well as coordination and cooperation between relevant institutions included in the fight against cyber crime;6.
 Establishing common standards, training and education of all institutions included in the development of cyber security;7.
 Strengthening the cyber security institutional and legal framework;8.
 Strengthening the national capacities for prevention and protection of cyber attacks, as well as conducting activities in order toraisethe national awareness ofcyber security.The National Cyber Security Strategyisdeveloped in accordance with the Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union and the NATO Cyber Defence Pledge for safe, secure, 

 
5 
 reliableand resilient digital environmenttothe benefit ofcitizens, business community and public administration.

 
6 
 Cyber trends, challenges and threatsIncreased number of Internet and ICT users and increased dependency onICTavailabilityIncreased number of Internet users(in the first quarterof 2017, 73.6% households had access to the Internet at home)and ICT users, along with increased use of Internet by thecompanies(starting from January 2017, 91.2% of businesses with 10 or more employees had broadband Internet connection) brings an ever growing dependency on the performanceof the Internet and ICT.Obstaclesin the availability of ICT dependent specific services dependent may pose a great risk for the unimpeded functioning of the Macedonian society, especially in relationto theCritical Information Infrastructure (CII) and other Important Information Systems (IIS). Implementation of e-servicesImplementation of electronic servicesin the Republic of Macedonia will significantly improvethe existingprocesses and overall functioningof the society. Nevertheless, the increasing number of e-services and applications bearsnew challenges and cyber risks. Low level of cyber security in small and medium enterprises(SMEs)A growing need to raise the awareness ofthe use of best practices for ICT and Information Systems (IS) protection in SMEs is evident. Such organizations oftenfind it difficultto identify and definetheir needs in relation to cyber security, whereas many SMEsdo not have the necessary resources and knowledge needed to surpass the challengesin this area. On the other hand, certain SMEsdata and systems may be of critical significance for the country, especially if they are sub-contractorsforlarge companies and institutions. Increased dependency of the defence and security sector on ICTThe defence and security sector is ever more dependent and based on the functionality of ICT systems. Vulnerability of such technologies, as well as disruptionor destruction 

 
7 
 threats increases the risks of negative implicationson the basic defence and security capabilitiesand fulfillment of criteria forfull-fledgedEU and NATO membership. Cyber crimeThe global connectedness, which if used appropriately may secure full anonymity, increases malicioususers’ opportunitiesto conducttheft and abuse of sensitive information. A large proportion of malicious actorsand criminal organizations recognize cyber space as adomainwherefast profit is feasible, as well as an environment which enableslower riskof detection. Globalization and anonymity not only enables malicious users to easily targetspecific victims, but alsoto executeoperations of larger scale and scope.Threats and risks related to the use of social mediaThe growingnumber of social media and the ever-increasingnumber of users of these networks, as well as the recent development of the face recognition algorithms,carryan inherentrisk for personal data theftanddigital identity theft. The targetsof such attacksmay be individuals, but also legal entities. Low level of cyber security awareness by endusers A large number of Internet users, including usersin the public and private sector,have low levelof awarenessof the most common cyber threats (such as phishing, fake e-stores, etc.), and subsequently fall victims of attacksthatmay easily be prevented by simple defence mechanisms. A growing need for cyber security professionalsExisting educational programs at all levels of formal education (primary, secondary and tertiary educational sectors) in the Republic of Macedoniado not satisfy in full the needs for educating and training specialistsable to respondto the latest challenges and trends in the cyber space. On the other hand, the demandforsuch experts on a global scale is growing exponentially. 

 
8 
 Inadequatecyber hygieneOne of the main reasons for the widespread successful rate of cyber attacks is theimproper practicingofthe so called “cyber hygiene” by the users and business community. In this manner, establishing active control over employee cyber hygiene and thereby effectively mitigating cyber security risks represents a major challenge for organizations nowadays. Furthermore, one of the many challengesin this regardis the increased complexity in the effort to maintainbasic cyber hygiene, such as asset identification, software updates, patching, standards management, as well as education and training of users in large organizations. Taking into consideration thatthe largest share of all cyber threats may beprevented by implementing proper cyber hygiene, this matter isof key importance forcyber security.  Internet of Things (IoT)Although the number of devices connected to the Internet has increased substantially, cyber hygiene is ignored by most userswithregards to theiractions and device protection.The IoT concept only intensifiesthis challenge. While anti-virus software, firewalls, and other related technologiesare automatically activated on traditional electronic devices, such as personal computers and laptops, this is not the case for smart devices such as TVs, fridges, videosurveillance, etc. Along these lines, the last period noteda drasticincrease inthemalicious usageof these devices, and threats to and from thesedevices are expected to increase inthe future.Artificial Intelligence(AI)The field of artificial intelligence -and particularly machine learning -already plays an important role in today’s global society.The continuous advancement of these fields already yield positive impacts, and is extensively being applied in the process of improving and perfecting security mechanisms for protection of cyber threats. On the other hand, AI isevolvingintoone of the major security challenges, since malicious users are increasingly utilizingthis technology in the process of enhancingmalicious softwarecapabilities.

 
9 
 Increase of the number and level of sophistication of malicious software An increase in thenumber and the level of sophistication ofmalicioussoftwareis evident in the last years. New malicious softwarevariantsaredevelopedon a daily basis, whereasmaliciousactorssignificantly limitthe attack source tracking, i.e. reverse engineering and forensic analysis, by using different mechanisms. Recent developments have given rise to an increase in thenumber of registered malicious softwareformobile device attacks, due to the enhanced vulnerability of mobile applications.This leads to an increasingnumber of users which do not employ basic security measures to protect their mobile devices (such as installing anti-virussoftware). Compromised hardwareand softwareAn increased number of users and ICT vendors are adding to the risk of supply-chain attacks where commercial of-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and softwarehave been compromised with security weaknesses, malicious codeor backdoors. Insufficient assurance in the validation of the COTS supply-chain may lead to personal data theft, acts of cyber espionage or involuntary participation in other malicious activities (e.g. botnet-basedattacks).Big data and Cloud services Data security and protection, especially for those of public interest (data relevant for CIIandIIS) are crucialfor the Republic of Macedonia. The amount of data being processed both in the public and in the private sector increases on a daily basis, resulting in therise ofstoragedemand; hence, cloud storage has been introduced as a new form of data storage. Nevertheless, the use of on-line and cloud servicesoften leads to inadequate security solutions with suspicions credibility. 

 
10 
 Threats against industrial control systems and national critical infrastructuresAtangibleprospect for the public and private sector to face increased number of cyber attacks, including industrial cyber espionage, cyber vandalism and vulnerability identification ofthe energy sector, financial sector, health sector, transport systems and other parts of CII and IIS emerges from the global trends.Thereby, a different attack approach is foreseeable, ranging from direct interruptionsin the functionality of certain parts of the critical infrastructure, to totalsystem block. Dysfunctionality of the aforementioned systems may bear fatal consequences. Moreover, due to the high level of heterogeneity of the technical solutions, technical analysis in later stages may beconsiderably aggravated.Botnets and DDoS/DoS attacksBotnets are mostly used for DDoS/DoS attacks,and are becoming more robust, resilient, hard to discover and track. Recentdevelopmentsin the field of IoT, which often involveweak security mechanisms,considerably contribute towards increasingthe scope and capacities for attack used by malicioususers. RansomwareThenumber of newransomware maliciousactivitieshas increasedexponentially, thereby posing a risk for all aspectsof society, including CII and IIS.This malicious software, although simple in nature, may cause largedamage by encrypting files or preventingaccess to applicationsor operatingsystems. With the purpose of getting access to their own data, i.e. to be able to decryptthe data, victims areoften willingto pay a large financial sumsto the attackers thatdeveloped and distributed the malicious software. Often, these activities are conductedby criminal organizations, in order to achieve financial gain. However, incertain cases ransomwareis intendedto cause damage or destroy certain targets and data, without the possibilityto retrieve the dataorreverse the action(e.g. NotPetya). Although individuals are most commonly targeted 

 
11 
 by ransomware, anincreasing number of cases are directed towardsenterprisesand institutions. Mining cryptocurrenciesEven thougha large part of registered malicious casesrelated to cryptocurrencies have been focusedonscamming or robbing cryptocurrency owners, computer processing power theftwith the intention toacquiregreater capacity for data miningis gaining momentum. The attack is not only intended forregular users, but also targets more powerful computer systemswhich may be essential, therefore causingsignificant damage. Cyber espionageThe increased percentage of digitization of the society and industry brought to life new channels and methods for certain entities to acquire unauthorized access to sensitive or confidential information.These activities may damage the national interests, businesses and their reputation, as well as citizens’ well-being. 

 
12 
 Cyber security principlesEffective and efficient cyber security capacitiesThe noteworthytechnological development and the ever-growingaccomplishments in ICT are increasingly enablingmalicioususers to invent new mechanisms for cyber securitydisruption. Therefore, it is vital for the information-communication infrastructurein the countryto be ableto respond to cyberspacechallenges. With the purpose of efficiently respondingto the new risks and threats, the Republic of Macedoniawill support research and development in the area of cyber security, as well as education and training at all levels in society, including training for end users. Having in mind that an effective outcome from the research and developmentin the area of cybersecurity may be achieved only by closecollaboration among all relevant entities, the Republic of Macedonia fully supports the multi-stakeholderapproach in building efficient cyber securitycapacities. In order to achieve effective management and in-time response to contemporary cyber threats,the Republic of Macedonia will facilitate theprocess ofstrengthening existing capacities and cooperation procedures between all relevant entities or individuals in the area of cyber security. Protection and preventionSevere cyber attackson the security of the country, among which cyber operations and espionagesponsored by other states (including theft of intellectual propertyfrom critical state institutions, CII and IIS)andthe use of cyber space in order to support terrorist activitiesare considered to be risks forthe national security. Hence, one of the main principles of this Strategy is tosupport thenational securitysystemof the Republic of Macedonia.Security for economic developmentDevelopinga secure society and applyingall security practices and processes through collaboration among all relevant stakeholders will enablebusinesses to remain 

 
13 
 trustworthy andreliablefor the clients, while simultaneously sustaining their profitability. Increasing the citizens’ trust in the digital services and electronic commerce will directly contribute towards the development of the digital economy and   global recognition ofthe Republic of Macedonia as a safe investment and corporate environment. In this manner, the implementation of new ICT solutionsand practices, as well astheglobal connectedness will support the economic growth, and also minimize negative externalities as a consequence of security incidents in the cyber space.Trust and availabilityResponse to cyberspace challenges is successfulonlywhen well-established procedures for cooperationamong all stakeholderswithcapacity tocontributeto cyber securityare applied. Due to this fact, close cooperation between the public, private and civil sector is of utmost importance. CII and IISprotection is vitalfor the Republic of Macedonia. Taking into consideration the factthat the largest part of this infrastructure and services are owned by the private sector,inclusionof this sectorin the processes related to cyber security protection is vital. Utilizing state-of-the-artprevention,security and protection measures does not completely rule out the occurrence of incidents, posing risks for the CII.When CII is involved, coordinated activities and well-prepared incidentrecovery plansshould beadequately regulated, and their effectiveness regularly tested through joint cyber exercises and simulations. In order to improve thecooperationin the field of cyber security among relevant stakeholders, the Republic of Macedonia will establish a Centre of Excellence. This Centre would be establishedwith the purpose of facilitatingexchange of experience among the public, private sector (above all companies managing CIIand IIS), civil organizations, academia and other institutions.

 
14 
 Legal assuranceIn the process ofimplementing cyber security measures, compliancewith the legal acts, the principles of basic human rightsand liberties, democracy and adherence to corevaluesis essential. One of the main characteristics of the Internet isthetransparency and accessibilityfor everyone at any time,with a guaranteed free information flow. The users of services in the cyber space requirereliability of the cyber space, informationintegrity, freedom of expression, personal data protection, as well asprivacy rights. Moreover, users expect to have unrestricted access to the Internetwithout interference, damage or illegalinterception of communications. In this manner, the Macedonian legislation as well as theinternational legal acts related to human rights, freedom of expression and privacyprotection are universal and also applicable in the cyber space. 

 
15 
 StakeholdersDefining the affected groups of actorsin the area of cyber security is an important segment that enables further definitionof the scope of the Strategy.  In this manner, the Strategy incorporates the following stakeholders: 1.
 Public sector,in termsof this Strategy, includesauthorities and other subjects, which in different ways represent the users of the cyber space and subjects that are obliged to apply measures that arise from the Strategy;2.
 Private sector, which is in close correlation with authorities and regulatory bodiesas affected parties by this Strategy, especially legal entitieswhich are subject to special regulations for critical infrastructureand the security and defence system;other legal and business subjects which in different mannersrepresent the users of cyber space;and subjects which are obliged to apply the measures that arise from the Strategy, with all peculiarities of those legal and business entities, with regards to their scope of work, number of employees and markets which they cover; 3.
 Academic community, educational institutions from the public and private sector which in diverse ways represent users of cyber space and subjects which are obliged to apply the measures arising from the Strategy;Through the development and implementation of educational programs and trainings, and provision of cyber security expertise, the academic community plays a crucial role in developing a strong body of knowledgein the field of cyber security. 4.
 Citizens and civil societyorganizations, encompassing users of ICT and services. The state of security in the cyber space is reflected upon citizens in many different ways. In this manner, the subject matter of cyber threats are not onlycitizens who are active users, but also those whohave their personal data present in the cyber space;

 
16 
 Vision and missionVisionThe Republic of Macedonia to have a safe, secure, reliableand resilient digital environment, supported by high-quality capacities, high-quality experts, built on trust, national and international cooperation in the field of cyber security. MissionThe Republic of Macedonia to have clearly defined and sustainable policies, which will be coordinated in the manner of advancing the national cybersecurity.

 
17 
 GoalsThe 5C Goalsof theNational Cyber Security Strategy arecomprised of five key areas and are aimed to facilitate the strengthen the existing and buildnewcapacitiesfor defencefrom cyber attacksand increasethe level of security in the cyber space across all sectors at all levels.Figure 1: 5C Goals of the National Cyber Security Strategy

 
18 
 GOAL1: Cyber ResilienceTheRepublic of Macedonia to havecyber resilient ICT infrastructure, and to identify and implement adequatesolutions in order to protectthe national interests.Cyber resilience provides confidentiality, integrityand availability through identification, protection and establishment ofpre-incidentstate of the cyber space.The public and private sector need to employtimely and accurate information andsuggestions for cyber security and also to be able to cooperatein case of cyber incidents. In this manner, it is necessary to identify all relevant capacities for cyber security across all relevant stakeholders, and to definespecific jurisdiction and activities in function of improving the cyber safety and managing cyber incidents. The end goal is to secure protection of an integralpart of the infrastructure in the country, and for relevant institutionsto useadequatesolutions in the process ofdefending the state interests, thereby demonstratingreadiness for severe, complex cyber threats. Activities:1.
 Advancing the capacities and capabilities of the National Centre forComputerIncident ResponseMKD-CIRT.2.
 Identification and protection of CII and IIS.3.
 Utilization ofthe best solutions for cyber incidentresponse with the purpose of protecting the national security interests.4.
 Taking measures and activities to handlecyber incidents of larger scale and scope.5.
 Development of national procedures in timeofpiece, crisis, a state of emergencyand state of war, in orderto manage incidents which will enable efficient intra-institutional cooperation, whereevery institutionhave a pre-defined role, will employ appropriate protocolsand procedures, as well as information exchange, communication and coordination channels.6.
 Development of methodology for national level cyber threat risk evaluation.

 
19 
 7.
 Establishinga single and comprehensive legal framework for cyber resilience, taking into account the legal regulatory framework in theRepublic of Macedoniaand EU.8.
 Continuousmonitoring, adoptionand implementation of internationally recognized standards and procedures in the field of cybersecurity.9.
 Continuous update onthe national strategic documents taking into account contemporarycyber securitystandards and technologies, as well as cyber threats.10.
 Continuous monitoring and analysis, in order to assess the current stateand to definethe measures and recommendationsforinstitutions in charge of CII and IISin order to raise the level of cyber security11.
 Continuous improvement of the resilience, integrity and reliabilityof CII and IIS. 12.
 Continuous analysis and monitoring of cyber threats and risks in the Republic of Macedonia through regular collectionof information from the relevantparties. 13.
 Defining precise procedures for safekeeping and protection of dataprocessed in the CII and IISsystems, as well as conducting continuous analysis and auditingthe efficiency of the defined procedures. 14.
 Conducting regular audits in orderto detect mistakes and vulnerabilities of the information systems and networks which are part of the CII and IIS.15.
 Continuous advancement of the technological and organizational needs for efficient management of cyber threats.16.
 Building and strengthening the national capacities for active cyber defence and taking appropriate countermeasures to handle and respond to cyber threats. 
 
 

 
20 
 GOAL2: Cyber capacitiesand cyber security cultureThe public, private sector and the Macedonian society to have a comprehensive understanding of cyber threats and to have the necessary capacitatesto protect themselves.Rather than solely focusing on raising the awareness of cyber threats, this goal also refers to the commitment towards building the necessary cyber security capacities by allaffected stakeholders with relevantactivities in this field. Promoting cyber security culture induces responsibility and understanding of cyber-related risks by all actors, developing a learned level of trust in e-services, and users’ understanding of how to protect personal information online. Accomplishingthis goal impliesthat security solutions are developed at all levels of society, assuringgreater resilience with regards to malicious cyber activities. In addition, this goal will enable efficient dissemination of cyber security measures and activities undertaken at variouslevels, including all relevant stakeholders, in order to achieve the necessary level of understandingand skills for staff, users and other partiesinvolved in the processes. The exchange of skills, knowledge and experience in the field of cyber security on a national level will be achieved through ad hoc inter-organizationalresearch teams comprised of experts in the public sector, private sector and the academic community. In the context of building and strengtheningthe necessarycyber security capacities, in order businesses and organizations to be able to handle the most sophisticated and complex attacksin the cyber space, expertise in this field will be secured through investment in cyber security, which is key to achieve competitive commercial performances. Activities:1.
 Increasing the cybersecurity capacities in SMEs.2.
 Advancing the cyber security capacities in the private sector, including the national infrastructure, CIIand the public sector.

 
21 
 3.
 Development and promotion of study programs and training in the area of cyber security at all levels.4.
 Supporting the research capacitiesand business innovations through the establishmentof scientific research centerin the fieldof cyber security.5.
 Participation in the national and international research projects and activities related to cyber security.6.
 Providing education and training, as wellas efforts to increasethe awareness of cyber security in the private sector.7.
 Providingresponse directions and guidelines in case of cyber incidentsandcyber crisis at all levels in society, including daily operations. 8.
 Conducting research and fortifyingnational prioritiesas a baseline to predictactivities and investments for cyber security development. 9.
 Acquiringand utilizingstate-of-the-arthardware and software solutions for prevention, identification and management ofcyber incidents. 10.
 Raising the level of awareness and basic cyber security knowledge amongyoung student population.11.
 Adapting and refiningthe existing study programs in primary and secondary schools in order to includecyber security elements in novelstudy programs with the purpose of producing high quality work forcein the field of cyber security.12.
 Increasing the awareness and basic understanding of cyber security for citizens and civil organizations. 13.
 Enabling high-qualityeducation and training in the field of cyber security forpublic administration employees. 14.
 Providingadequate education and training in the field of cyber security for managerial staff in the public and private sector.15.
 Continuous training of experts specializing in differentaspects of cyber security.16.
 Establishing retention mechanisms for ICT and cyber security work force.

 
22 
 GOAL3:Combating cyber crimeRepublic of Macedonia to strengthen its capacitiesfor prevention, research and adequate response tocybercrime. The development and utilizationof informationand operationaltechnologies leads to the occurrenceof different formsof abuse characterized as cybercrime. Cybercrimemay appear in the form ofInternet abuse and scams, but emerge as anattackon more sophisticated and complex systems. In this manner, cyber-crimemay be motivated by different causes and carried outby diverse
 agents.Given the widespread range of cyber crimeand scope of institutions and organizationsin charge of cyber crime management and handling, this goalrequiresthe establishmentof a specialized, detailed national plan for cybercrimemanagement, including thecyber spaceenabled crime. This plan should define the problem of cybercrimeand the challenges generated by it. It requires defining the prevention activities and securingthe functions vital for the society. The most efficient way forpreventionis toprovideeffective directions and solutions so thatcyber hygienecan become an integral part of the culture and mindset of the Macedonian society. Inter-institutional and multi-disciplinary approachesarekey in order to efficiently tacklecyber-crime. Activities:1.
 Advancing the cyber crimehandling and management capacities.2.
 Harmonizing the national withinternational policies related to cyber-crime.3.
 Development of a single, comprehensive legal framework for cybercrime, taking into consideration the applicablelegal framework in the Republic of Macedoniaand EU. 4.
 Modernizing authorities in charge of cybercrimein order to efficientlycombatcybercrime.5.
 Establishingefficient procedures to report and research cyber crime.6.
 Establishingformal procedures for cooperation and exchange of informationin the field of cyber crimeamong relevant national entitiesand other security services.

 
23 
 7.
 Advancing cooperation with regional and international organizations in the fight against cyber crime. 8.
 Advancing the existing and establishing new mechanisms for cooperation and exchange of information with the private and civil sectors.9.
 Securing expert-specialist education and training for individualsworkingin the field of identification and research of cyber crime. 10.
 Developing a multidisciplinary academic environment for the advancement of national capacities for cyber crimeinvestigations.11.
 Active participation in the creation of international cyber crime regulationsand standards, as well as their implementation onnational level.12.
 Continuous assessmentof the adequacy and efficiency of the national cyber crimeregulation. 13.
 Providingcontinuous educationand trainingforlawenforcement entitiesin the field of cyber security, cyber crimeand electronic evidence.

 
24 
 GOAL4: Cyber defenceRepublic of Macedonia to strengthen its capacitiesin order to be able to protect national interests and reduce current and future cyber space risks.In order to be able to tackle cyber space risks, the Republic of Macedonia defines its cyber defence capacities according to highest international standards,as part of the national cyber security framework. Developingcyber defence capabilities in the Army of the Republic of Macedonia is part of acomprehensive national defenceapproach. Establishing acyber component in the national security is ensured by the inclusion ofexperts from the defence and security sector in all working groups and bodies focused oncyber crime. One of the conditions for the establishment of efficient national cyber defence is for all organizations that offer services in the cyberspaceto continuously update and adjustoperational plans in accordance withnational scenarios (in order to protect CII and IIS).The civil-militarycooperation on international level is based onstate-ownedresources, which arealso in operationin the cyber space;regarding warning, prevention, protection, distraction, detectionand active defence.Republic of Macedonia, as a country partner and candidate for membership in NATO, the European Union and other international militaryand civil organizations, in order to be included in collective defence, is requiredto fully comply with the standards and directions provided by these organizations and to use the resources and opportunitiesthat these organizations offer. Compliance with international cross-border organizations refers tothe development and implementation of common cyber security capacities, standards and trainings.Withinthe collective defence systems, the Republic of Macedonia will cooperate and exchange information with these organizations in the field of cyber defence.Activities:1.
 Defining the national cyber defence capacities.

 
25 
 2.
 Defining the militarycapacities in the Ministry of Defence and the Army for handling threats in the cyber space.3.
 Establishing, developingand sustaining the defined capacities and capabilities for cyber defence.4.
 Establishing acyberdefencesystem forthe national critical infrastructure.5.
 Creating a single and comprehensive cyber defence legal framework, taking into consideration the regulatory framework in the Republic of Macedonia, as well as NATOand EUdirectives. 6.
 Addressingand reducingthe risks in the cyber space.7.
 Establishing and sustaining a mutual international cooperation in order to join efforts in combatingshared cyber threats and increasing the national and international security and stability.8.
 Defining and coordinating militaryplanning regarding theuse of militarycyber capacities and the national cyber defence in different situations. 9.
 Inclusion and contribution in the collective cyber defence through international cooperation.10.
 Providing continuous educationand training in orderto secure a high level of awareness and individual responsibility with regards to cyber defence and national defenceand security.11.
 Development and implementation of a system and programs for the exchange and sharing of information, knowledge and experience between the public, private and defence and security sectorin the field of cyber defence, in order to protect the CII and IIS.

 
26 
 GOAL5: Cooperation and exchange of informationRepublic of Macedonia to protect its cyber space through cooperation and exchange of information at national and international level, in order to facilitate an open, free, stableand secure cyber space.Every organization and every individual should take responsibility for theuse of new technologies. In order toenjoya safe cyber spaceand a transparent and safe use of ICTat a national level, it is essentialto define efficient and effective proceduresfor cooperation and exchange of information across all stakeholders. Furthermore, it is vitalto strengthen the capacities, procedures and processes between participatingstakeholders through continuous cooperation. International cooperation represents one of the key segments in the efforts to increase the capacities to handle cyber threats. In somecases, the Republic of Macedonia mayconfront cyber attackswhich are partly or whollyorganized and implemented by malicious users outside of the physical borders of the country. In this case, success of the counter measures undertaken to reduce the effects of registered cyber incidents and undertaking appropriate measures against the crime perpetrators largely dependson the established cooperation onbilateral, regional and international level. In order to ensurefull and operationalabilityof state institutions in charge of cyber risk and incident management, international partnerships of those institutions withother nationsand organizations are much needed. The Republic of Macedonia undertakesall necessary actionsin order to be recognized as a country committedto the security of its own cyber space; a country which is actively involved in the global fight against mass malicious use of cyber space. In this manner, active international participation in tackling the global challenge of cyber threats would contribute to increase of state capacities for handling cyber risks. Activities:1.
 Promoting and advancing the Internet and norms of behavior of the state which reflects the interests of the Republic of Macedonia.

 
27 
 2.
 Developing aneffective model for cooperation on a national level among institutions in charge of cyber securityand advancing their existing structure and processes.3.
 Establishing newand strengthening existing networksof operational national, bilateral, regional and international cooperation. 4.
 Active participation and contribution towards building international abilities for cyber securityandtrustbuilding activities.5.
 Efficient exchange of information between the state and the entitieswhich manage the CII and IIS.6.
 Support in the process of utilizing thecyber space economic opportunities for the benefits ofthepopulation in the Republic of Macedonia.7.
 Cooperation among stakeholders in the manner of developing and implementingtechnologies which will secure maximum protection and transparency, as well as testing and assessmentof the level of security of utilizedtechnologies.8.
 Cooperation with differentstakeholders on anational and international levelfor various research projects in the field of cyber security.9.
 Organizing and participating on various international activities and initiativesin the field of cyber security.10.
 Developing efficient mechanisms and procedures for international cooperation on a diplomatic level in case of cyber incidents, attacks and crisis, according to internationally established principles.11.
 Promoting and advancing norms, rules andprinciples of responsible behavior by the state, according to internationally established principles.12.
 Establishing and strengtheningcooperation and building trustwith other public and private international CERT and CSIRT teams, academiccommunities and other international organizations.13.
 Cooperation of all relevant stakeholders in the development ofnationallegislatives, andcontributing in the process of defining international legislatives

 
28 
 related to the cyber space behavior, freedom of speech, personaldata protection, privacy, as well as basic human rights and liberties.14.
 Cooperationof all relevant stakeholdersin the process of developing and unifyingsecurity norms, standardizing cooperation, as well as defining and setting mandatorylevel of protection of entities that manage CII and IIS.15.
 In cooperationwith the private sector, to facilitate acyber space that offers safe environment for the exchange of information, research and development, as well as to providesecureinformation security infrastructure that would stimulate entrepreneurship, thereby supporting competitiveness of all domestic companies and protecting their investments.16.
 Building trust among all relevant stakeholders, including the development of a national platform/systemfor the exchange of information regarding laws, incidents and imminent threats.

 
29 
 ImplementationWithin three months ofthe adoption of the National Cyber Security Strategy, an Action Plan for implementation of the goals and activities defined in the Strategy will be developed. Relevant authorities defined in the Strategy and the Action Plan will beresponsible for the implementation of the foreseengoalsand activities. The implementation of measures defined in this Strategy will be coordinated by the National Cyber Security Council. Based on the Strategy, relevant authorities, ministries and other institutions will conduct analysis of their current legislation and update regulations andprocedures accordingly. Relevant ministries will deliver periodic reports for the implementation status to the National Cyber Security Council. Depending on the current developments and needs, the National Cyber Security Strategy may be revised and updated. For this purpose, the Republic of Macedonia will establish a National Cyber Security Counciland a Body with operationalcyber security capacities.  National Cyber Security CouncilIn order to be able to perform coordination and monitoring of the activities defined inthe National Cyber Security Strategyandthe Action Plan, as well as to be able to definenew strategic directions and recommendations related to the cyber security segment, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia will establish a National Cyber Security Council,responsible for the execution of the followingactivities:
• Systematicmonitoring and coordination of the implementation of the National Cyber Security Strategy considering all existing and upcoming potential challenges in the field of cyber security.
• Suggesting precise measures for improving the implementation of the National Cyber Security Strategyand Action Plan.
• Suggesting additions and updates forthe Strategy and the Action Plan in order toestablishadvanced management and toincorporatenew challengesin the field of cyber security.

 
30 
 
• Identifying the challenges for managing cyber crisis and suggesting adequate measures for greater efficiency.
• Participation, coordination and alignment with the activities of the Security Council of the Republic of Macedonia.
• Analysis of the current level of security based on reports delivered by the Body with operational cyber security capacities.
• Authorizethe plan of measures and activities forcyber crisis suggested by the Bodywith operational cyber security capacities.
• Developing programs and action plans for activities in the field of cyber security that need to be implementedby the Body with operational cyber security capacities.Body
 with operational cyber security capacitiesThe Body with operational cyber security capacities may be established either as a separate, newly established entity (agency, directorate) or as a newly formedorganizational unit withinan existing state organ. The Body with operational cyber security capacities will bein charge of operationalization of identified activities defined in the Strategy and Action Plan for cyber security,as well as directions and recommendations received by the National Cyber Security Council. Theprincipal obligationsof this Body include: 
• Developing and issuing recommendations, opinions, reports, researchand directions related to the implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy, the Action Plan, as well as other related strategic documents. 
• Monitoring trends in cyber space security with the goal of detecting threats that may result in cyber crisis.
• Creating and sharing periodic evaluations for the state of cyber security.
• Continuous cooperation and exchange of information regarding cyber threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, risks and statistics withall relevant stakeholders.

 
31 
 
• Proposing a plan of measures and responsive activities in case of cyber crisis.
• Proposingand implementing nationaland internationalexercises in the fieldof cyber security.
• Developing capacities for operational assistance of entities for handling attacks of larger scopeand scale.
• Monitoringthe current state of ICTof every relevant stakeholder(users of the capacities and services provisioned by this Body)anddelivering regular reports for any changes or incidents registered by theentities with the goal of preventive alertfor possible system misuse.
• Monitoring the implementation of activities incorporatedinthe National Cyber Security Strategy and other strategic documents and international standards, by all entities (users) of the services provided bythe Body with operational cyber security capacities.
• Coordinative and consultancy activities duringtheimplementation of new ICT solutions and developing software solutions for all stakeholders (users) of this Body.Implementation risks
 
• One of the major risks relatedto the implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy is the lack of awareness for the importance of the need for safe cyber space. This risk is related to the lack of cyber hygiene and political will, as well asconsensus for a systematic approach tackling the challenges related to cybersecurity. In this manner, unsystematic approach may cause harmful consequences affectingthe country, especially in the case when the state is faced with advanced, large-scalecyber threats.
 Establishing effective cooperation among all relevant stakeholders is also one of the major risks associated with the implementation of the Strategy.For some stakeholders, cooperation in the field of cyber security isrelatively novel, requiring organizations to implementcertain changes. The main 

 
32 
 challenge is the widespread range ofinterests and responsibilitiesof different stakeholders.
 In addition, trust between public and private sector may also poseone of the main obstacles in the effective implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy. Establishing trust is a process that requires dialogue, as well as extensive time and effort. Due to mistrust, certain institutions are not willingto report security incidents, mostly because of potential reputation loses. The lack of exchange of information and absence of obligatory reporting ofincidents leads to insufficient awareness of the current state of cyber threats, which in turn may resultindifficulties in the process ofcombatingknown challenges in the cyber space.
 A great implementation risk may also be the lack of financial and human resourcesand qualified work forceto manage challenges in the cyber space. The successful implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy will have positiveinfluence on increased cyber security, thereby contributing towards thenational security. In addition, ensuring a securecyber space will increase the trust of users in the cyber space, which may significantly improve the development of new Internet-based services and thereby stimulate the economic growth of the Republic of Macedonia.

 
33 
 APPENDIX1DefinitionsBotnet–a network of private computers infected with malicious software which is being controlled whileownersare not aware of it.Civil organizations–every association, foundation, foreign organizations, as well asother forms of organizations, registered according toprovisions of the Law for associations and foundations, but also non formal civil movements or group of citizens dealingwith initiatives in the field of protection of human rights and liberties. Backdoor –a method in which the security mechanismof the systemis bypassed, with the purpose of securing access to the information system or its data. Malware-  a software which is specifically designed to disrupt, damage,or to get unauthorizedaccess to an information system. Industrial control system–Information system inSCADA (Supervisory control and data acquisition) and distribution control system groups, used for industrial operations, such as manufacturing, production and distribution control through programming logistics controllers which aredifferent from conventional information technologies.Internet–global computer networkwhich facilitates connection of information and communication devices and interconnected systems by using standardized communication protocols.Information security–state of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information,achieved by the use of adequate security measures. Information systems–systems included in the process of enablingany service, transaction or information/data transmittedover ICT.Classified information –information protected from unauthorizedaccess or use, defined by the level of classification. 

 
34 
 Critical Information Infrastructure–refers to any information-communication system whose maintenance, security and safety are critical for the national security, economy, public health and country security.  The national critical information infrastructure is part of the critical infrastructure (CI). Cryptocurrency –decentralizedvirtual currencies, based on mathematical principles and protected by cryptography, where the principles of cryptography are used for the implementation of a distributed, decentralized, secure information economy.Personal data–any information which refers to physically identifying an individual or an individual that may be identified,whereas an identifiable individual is a person whose identity may be determined directly or indirectly, especially on the basis of a Unique Master Citizen Number or on the basis of one or more physical characteristics, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity.Authorities–state administration bodies, other state organs, organs within ministries, governing organizations and independent bodies, judicial authorities and courts, municipality bodies, City of Skopje and municipalities of the City of Skopje, as well as other legal entities and individuals which by law are entitled to perform public authorizations. In this context, the term other subjects referto: legal subjects that provide and secure services of public interest, e.g. entitiesin the field of education, health, finance, banking, insurance, energy, water supply, electronic communications and communal services. National security–a system for contemporary form of organizationand functioning of the society whichimplementsspecific activities and measures for prevention and repressionin order toprotect fundamental societal values fromsecurity challenges, threats and risks at all levels.Ransomware–type of malicious softwaredesigned to block access to the information system or data stored in that system, often by encrypting, by which certain amount of ransom is required forthe victim to pay for the attacker to enablingdescriptionof the information system or to allow access to data. 

 
35 
 Awareness–refers to the security awareness of all legal subjects that share responsibility for information security. Cyber security–activities and measures for protection of information systems that constitutethe cyber space of attacks, discovery ofattacks and cyber security incidents, as well as activation ofa mechanism for counter-action and systems renewal to a state prior to the cyber attack.Cyber war–an act of war in and around the virtual space with meanspredominantly related to information technology. Cyber threat–potential cause for incident in the cyber space that may cause damage of any institution or system. Cyber incident–one or more events related to cyber security that are harmful with respect toconfidentiality, integrity or availability of information and disrupt the security of the information system. Cyber crisis–an event or events in the cyber space that may cause or already have caused significant disruptionor damage in the social, political and economic life of the Republic of Macedonia. Such situation mayultimatelyinfluencethe security of the citizens, the system of democracy, political stability, the economy, living environment and other national values, i.e. the overallnational security and defence.Cyber crime–acts against the law conducted in the cyber space, e.g. crime that may only be conducted through the use of ICT devices and systems, where the systems and devices are either used as tools for the criminal act, or theyare the primary target;crime enabled by the cyber space, such as traditional criminal acts and materials for child abuse, which increases with the growing use of computers, computer networks or other forms of ICT.Cyber space-space where communication between information systems takes place.In context of thisStrategy, thedefinition encompassesthe Internet and all information systems related to it, as well as independent information systems. 

 
36 
 Cyber attack–operations which individualsand/or information systems deliberately conduct in any place in the cyber space with the purpose of endangering the confidentiality, integrity or availability of information systems in the national cyber space. Cyber defence–all cyber space defence measures with militaryand other capacities in order to achieve strategic militarypurposes. Cyberresilience–the ability for preparation, adjusting, sustainingand fast recovery from disruptions stemming from intentional attacks, accidents or natural threats or incidents in the cyber space.Cyber risk–potential risk from causing damage by using weaknesses in one or more information subjects. Cyber sabotage–cyber attackdirected against the integrity and availability of the ICT systems. Cyber hygiene–reference for practices and steps that users of information devices and systems should take in order to maintain the system health and improve the Internet security. Cyberespionage–cyber attacksdirected against the confidentiality of ICT systems.CERT–refers to an emergency team which will preventthreats and renew ICT systemsin case of security incidents. In general, CERT/CSIRT/CIRT providesservices for responding to emergencies, prevention services and managing the safety quality. CERT network includes the same peoplewho work on cyber security. 

 
37 
 APPENDIX2Acronyms ИКТ –Information Communication TechnologiesEGDI–e-Government Development IndexGCI–Global Cybersecurity IndexIDI–ICTdevelopmentindexNRI-Networked Readiness IndexCII–Critical Information InfrastructureIIS–Important Information SystemsDoS–Denial of ServiceDDoS–Distributed Denial of ServiceCERT–Computer Emergency Readiness TeamCIRT–Computer Incident Response TeamCSIRT-  Computer Security Incident Response TeamSCADA-Supervisory control and data acquisitionЕU–European UnionNATO–The North Atlantic Treaty OrganizationMKD-CIRT–National Centre forComputerIncident Response

