Information and
Cyber Security
strategy of Sri Lanka




National Information
and
Cyber Security Strategy
of Sri Lanka

(2019-2023)

November 2018
Sri Lanka Computer Emergency Ministry of Telecommunication,
Readiness Team | Coordination Centre Digital Infrastructure and Foreign Employment



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Attribution

This publication should be attributed as follows

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka CERT|CC, National Information and
Cyber Security Strategy of Sri Lanka 2019-2013, November 2018

Published by

Sri Lanka CERT|CC

First Print: November 2018
Next Revision: November 2019

Contact

Enquires about this document are welcome and should be directed to :
Research and Policy Unit

Sri Lanka CERT|CC

Room 4-112, BMICH, Colombo 7,

Sri Lanka.

Telephone: Tel: +94 11 269 1692/269 5749/267 9888

Fax: +94 11 269 1064

Email: cert@cert.gov.lk

Website: www.cert.gov.lk

Design and layout by
Sri Lanka CERT|CC



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Table of Contents

Acronyms and Abbreviations... ccescessssssssnneesssessessscsseessesnesseesscsesstesesesniesnnesesseess i
PrefACE oases ess eessesseessessesseessesseessessnsesuesstessssueesecsussstesuesuessessuesuesuesssesnessesuesuesseaueesecsaeeessess 1
Analysis of the Present Status occ essesseesseseeseesessessessssssssnessessesiesssssesneesneeneensesss 2
Cyber Security Landscape oo... cece eececseesesseeseeseeessessnessessesseesuesessessesseeseesnesssnneessesseess 3
Strategy .... 5
Thrust # 1: Establishment of the Governance Framework 00.00... cesses eeseesteseesees 6
Thrust # 2: Legislation, Polices, ANd Standards... eececeessessesseseesesseeseeseeseesesseseeseeneeeesenneeeeees 8
Thrust # 3: Development of a Competent Workforce oo... eee eeseeseestesssnunteeteeeeeeesees 9
Thrust # 4: Resilient Digital Government Systems and Infrastructure .......... eee 12
Thrust # 5: Raising Awareness and Empowerment Of CitiZ@Ns .o...eeeeeesessssesessseeeeeeeeseeeesees 14
Thrust # 6: Development of Public-Private, Local- International Partnerships. ................ 16
End Note oo. eeesessssscsssssssssssnnnesssscsesssssssssssnunmnsssceseseessssssssunusentseseseesssssssssssnunueesesseseeessssssununseesesess 19




INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Acronyms and Abbreviations

APCERT
Sri Lanka CERT|CC
Cll
clo
CIRT
CSIRT
csP
Dos
DDoS
EGDI
ENISA
FIRST
GCE
Gcl
HCl
ICANN
ICT
ICTA
IP
ISACA
ISO
ISOC
ISP

IT

ITU
IWWN
M&E
NCA
NCSOC
NGO
NICSA
NVQ
Os!

Tl
TRC
UNIGF

Asia Pacific Computer Emergency Response Team

Sri Lanka Computer Emergency Readiness Team | Coordination Centre
Critical Information Infrastructure

Chief Innovation Officer

Computer Incident Response Team

Computer Security Incident Response Team
Certification Service Provider

Denial of Service

Distributed Denial of Service

e-Government Development Index

European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
Forum for Incident Response Security Teams

General Certificate of Education

Global Cybersecurity Index

Human Capital Index

nternet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
nformation and Communication Technology
nformation and Communication Technology Agency
nternet Protocol

nformation Systems Audit and Control Association
nternational Organization for Standardization

nternet Society

nternet Service Provider

nformation Technology

nternational Telecommunication Union

nternational Watch and Warning Network
Monitoring and Evaluation

National Certificate Authority

National Cyber Security Operation Centre
Non-government Organization

National Information and Cyber Security Agency
National Vocational Qualification

Online Service Index

Telecommunication Infrastructure Index
Telecommunication Regulatory Commission

United Nations Internet Governance Forum



Preface

Around the globe, digital technologies have evolved
into a powerful economic tool that has improved
quality of life of citizens and transformed the way that
governments, businesses, and citizens connect,
engage, and access information and services. Many
societies are now dependent on digital technologies
which has led these technologies to be considered as
a fundamental social infrastructure.

Along with their numerous benefits digital
technologies also bring with them numerous cyber
threats. The global number of cyber security incidents
recorded in 2015 was 59.06 million’. A study estimates
that the total annual cost of all data breaches by 2019
will be $2.1 trillion which is almost four times the
estimated cost of breaches in 2015”. In Sri Lanka, The
Sri Lanka Computer Emergency Readiness Team|
Coordination Centre (Sri Lanka CERT|CC) received
3907 cyber security related incidents in 2017, which is
a significant increase from 2010.

In this context, we, the government of Sri Lanka, seeks
to show our commitment to keep the nation safe,
secure and prosperous, by introducing Sri Lanka’s first

Information and Cyber Security Strategy which will be
implemented over a period of five years from 2019 to
2023. Our strategy aims to create a resilient and
trusted cyber security ecosystem that will enable Sri
Lankan citizens to realize the benefits of digital
technology, and facilitate growth, prosperity and a
better future for all Sri Lankans.

Our strategy is underpinned by six pillars:

1. Establishment of a governance framework to implement
the National Information and Cyber Security Strategy

2. Enactment and formulation of legislation, policies, and
standards to create a regulatory environment to protect
individuals and organizations in the cyber space

3. Development of a skilled and competent workforce to
detect, defend and respond to cyber attacks

4. Collaboration with public sector authorities to ensure
that the digital government systems implemented and
operated by them have the appropriate level of cyber
security and resilience

5. Raising awareness and empowering citizens to defend
themselves against cybercrimes

6. Development of public-private, local-international
partnerships to create a robust cyber-security ecosystem



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Analysis of the Present Status focuses on the status of telecommunication
infrastructure, Internet facilities, and Internet usage,

and (c) 0.7363 human capital index (HCI) which focus
on adult literacy and level of schooling’. Thus, our
scores in the online service index and the human
capital index are above the global average while our
Our ICT Readiness score in the telecommunication infrastructure index is
below the global average.

This section presents an overview of the overall ICT
readiness, the current status of the digital government
initiatives in Sri Lanka, and information and cyber
security landscape of Sri Lanka.

In Sri Lanka IT Literacy is 28.3% and Digital Literacy is
38.7%, Fixed telephone subscription per 100
inhabitants is 12.49, mobile phone subscriptions per
100 inhabitants is 103.16, and broadband
subscriptions per 100 inhabitants is 10.45*. Household
computer ownership is 23.5% while the Internet usage
stands at 21.3%, and email usage at 11%. There is a
significant disparity in ICT readiness among the Urban,
Rural and Estates sectors in Sri Lanka.

Our Progress in Digital Government

Sri Lanka is ranked 79 in the United Nations e-
government development index (EGDI) among 190
member countries‘. In 2016, we scored (a) 0.6522

in online service index (OSI) which focuses on overall
digital government applications, (b) 0.2445 in
telecommunication infrastructure index (TII) which



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Cyber Security Landscape

Our Status in the Cybersecurity Index
Among the 193 ITU member countries, Sri
Lanka is ranked 72 in the Global
Cybersecurity Index (GCI) in the year 2016°.
GCI assesses a country's overall commitment
towards cyber security in relation to five
different dimensions, namely (a) legal, (b)
technical, (c) capacity building, (d)
organizational, and (e) cooperation
dimensions®. Our performance in each
dimension is assessed and rated either as
initiating, maturing, or leading. Sri Lanka’s
overall performance is rated as maturing.

Our Performance in the GCI° (2017)

a. LEGAL: We are Initiating
Assessed with reference to the existence of
legislation on cybercrime and cyber security, and
legal training.

b. TECHNICAL: We are Maturing
Assessed with reference to the existence of
technical institutions and frameworks for dealing
with cybersecurity related issues.

c. CAPACITY BUILDING: We are Maturing
Measured based on the existence of research
and development, education and training
programs, certified professionals and public
sector agencies fostering capacity building

d. ORGANIZATIONAL: We are Maturing
Assessed based on the existence of institutions
for policy formulation and coordination, and
strategies for cybersecurity development at the
national level

e. COOPERATION: We are Initiating
Measured based on the existence of
partnerships, cooperative frameworks and
information sharing networks



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Incidents Reported . FAST FACTS ON SOCIAL MEDIA RELATED INCIDENTS (2017)
Over the past few years, Sri Lanka CERT|CC has
experienced a rapid increase in the number of es

cybersecurity related incidents reported to it. Le
Reported incidents rose from 71 to 222 from 2010 to 4.2 million
2017. The number of reported social media related Use Facebook in Sri Lanka. This amounts to 63% of

incidents, have also increased exponentially. It has the total number of Internet users in Sri Lanka’.
ballooned from 80 incidents in 2010 to 3685 incidents

in 2017.




INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Our Strategy
Six Strategic Thrust Areas

1. Establishment of Governance Framework
Establishment of a governance framework to
implement National Information and Cyber
Security Strategy

Our vision is to create a resilient and trusted
cyber security ecosystem that will enable Sri
Lankan citizens to realize the benefits of
digitalization and to facilitate growth

2. Enactment and Establishment of
Legislation, Policies and Standards
Formulation of legislation, policies, and
standards to create a regulatory environment
to protect individuals and organizations in the
cyber space

3. Development of Competent Workforce
Development of a skilled and competent
workforce to detect, defend and respond to
cyber-attacks

4. Resilient Digital Government and
Infrastructure
Work with public sector authorities to ensure
that the digital government systems
implemented and operated by them have the
appropriate level of cyber security and
resilience

5. Raising Awareness and Empowerment of
Citizens
Make our citizens more competent in
protecting their identity, privacy and economic
assets in the cyber space

6. Development of Public-Private, Local-
International Partnerships
Development of public-private, local-
international partnerships to create a robust
cybersecurity ecosystem



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Thrust # 1: Establishment of
the Governance Framework

Our Strategy

In 2006, the government of Sri Lanka established Sri
Lanka CERT|CC as the single trusted source of
advice on the latest threats and vulnerabilities
affecting computer systems and networks, charged
with the responsibility of providing technical
support in responding to and recovering from
cyber-attacks. Sri Lanka CERT was established under
the Information and Communication Technology
Agency (ICTA) of Sri Lanka, and now it is operating
directly under the purview of the Ministry of
Telecommunication, Digital Infrastructure and
Foreign Employment.

As the complexity of the cyber security ecosystem
increases, the government of Sri Lanka recognizes
the necessity of introducing a National Information
and Cyber Security Strategy to cope with emerging
threats. It is a high-level top-down approach to
information and cyber security that establishes a 11.
range of national objectives and priorities that

should be achieved in a specific timeframe.

Our Initiatives

Establishment of the National
Information and Cyber Security Agency
of Sri Lanka (NICSA)

In line with the strategy, a National Information and NICSA will be established as the apex

Cyber Security Agency will be established. The institution for all cyber security related
Agency will be responsible for overseeing the affairs in Sri Lanka. The Agency mandate
implementation of the cyber security strategy, shall be to oversee the implementation of
setting national polices, facilitating the protection of the National Information and Cyber Security
critical national infrastructure, educating citizens, Strategy.

building a pioneering technology competent 1.1.1. Agency shall be governed by a
workforce, and promoting industry development. high-level committee which

comprises of the representatives of
Ministries involved in
Telecommunication and Digital
Infrastructure, Defence, Justice,
Finance, Media, and Public

Our strategy is to establish a powerful
agency which oversees the overall
implementation of the Information and Cyber

Security Strategy of Sri Lanka, and to establish Administration. The Head of the
specialized subordinate agencies for Agency shall represent the National
effectively battling emerging cyber threats Security Council of Sri Lanka.




INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

The agency shall,

1.1.2.

1.13.

114.

115.

1.1.6.

117.

Function as the command and
control body to promote this
strategy and play a leading role in
implementing cyber security
initiatives set forth in this strategy.
Provide technical support for law
enforcement authorities in
conducting digital forensic
investigations.

Build the capacity of sectoral CERTs
and facilitate Sri Lanka CERT|CC to
coordinate with sectoral CERTs for
sharing incident information, best
practices and other security related
information.

Provide technical support to
government bodies such as
Ministries, authorities, boards,
corporations etc.

Disseminate emerging cyber threat
warnings to all Sri Lankans.

Act as a certification body issuing
licenses for firms providing
information security related
services.

1.2. Institutions Under the NICSA

12.1.

1.2.2.

Sri Lanka CERT|CC will continue to
operate as the National CERT to
protect users in the public and
private sector organizations and the
general public by providing up-to-
date information on potential
threats and vulnerabilities, and by
undertaking computer emergency
response handling services.

NICSA will establish a 24 X 7 Cyber
Security Call Centre with a focus on
assisting citizens, government
organizations, and private firms to
respond to cyber security incidents.

1.3.

1.2.3. NICSA will establish a National
Cyber Alert System with the
involvement of Internet Service
Providers (ISPs) and Telcos to
deliver targeted, timely, and
actionable information to Sri
Lankans and to educate citizens on
how to secure their computer
systems.

1.2.4. NICSA will establish a Digital
Forensic Lab to conduct digital
forensic investigations and
examinations in the areas of
computer forensics, mobile
forensics, audio forensics, video
forensics and so forth.

1.2.5. NICSA will establish the National
Cyber Security Operating Centre
(NCSOC) for monitoring threats to
digital government applications,
critical information infrastructure,
and critical systems of private firms.

1.2.6. NICSA will establish the National
Certification Authority (NCA) to
address the limitations of the
Certification Service Providers
(CSPs).

NICSA will establish a Research Unit
for developing, coordinating and
stimulating continuous research
activities in the fields of Strategic
Policy Research, Information
Security Research, Cyber Security
and Technology related research.

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
Framework

A comprehensive results based M&E
framework will be developed to assess and
measure the performance of the outcomes
and outputs as a result of the
implementation of the strategy.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Thrust # 2: Legislation, Polices,
and Standards

Our Strategy

The number of reported incidents involving
cybercrimes against individuals and organization in
Sri Lanka is increasing day by day. These include
cybercrimes against individuals such as credit card
fraud, revenge porn, crimes again property such as
worm attacks, hacking, and intellectual property
theft, and crimes against governmental and other
organizations such as cyber terrorism, hacking of
websites, processing of unauthorized information,
and hacking into sensitive financial data. To battle
cybercrimes against individuals and organizations
effectively, it is necessary to enact and formulate
appropriate legislation, policies, and standards for
ensuring protection of sensitive data, digital
transactions, electronic communications, privacy,
and freedom of expression in the cyber space.

The government of Sri Lanka has taken a number of
steps in this regard such as the introduction of the
government security policy (2009) based on ISO
27000, and data sharing policy, and the enactment
of relevant legislation such as the Electronic
Transactions Act No. 19 of 2006, Payment Devices
Frauds Act No 30 of 2006, the Intellectual Property
Rights Acts, and Computer Crimes Act No 24 of
2007. Sri Lanka ratified the Budapest Convention on
Cybercrime in 2015 and became the first country in
South Asia to join this convention. Moreover, a
Computer Crimes Division was established in the
Criminal Investigation Department of Sri Lanka
Police in line with the enactment of Computer
Crimes Act.

To further strengthen our regulatory framework to
effectively battle emerging cybercrimes, gaps in the
existing policies and laws will be identified, and new
legislation, policies, and standards will be drafted
and implemented to create a secure cyberspace for
individuals and organizations.

Our strategy is to create an appropriate
regulatory framework for securing individuals
and organizations in the cyberspace and to
strengthen prosecution support for modern
cyber offences through the introduction of
relevant legislation, policies and standards

Our Initiatives

2.1. Introduce a New Cyber Security Act

2.1.1. The government will introduce a new
Cybersecurity Act for the
establishment of the NICSA and for
equipping the agency with the
necessary powers to effectively
address increasingly sophisticated
threats to the nation

2.1.2. The new Act will establish a
comprehensive framework for the
prevention and management of
cyber incidents, and complement the
existing Computer Crime Act No. 24
of 2007. The existing Computer
Crimes Act is inadequate for
addressing modern day cybercrimes.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

2.2. Data Protection and Privacy Laws

2.2.1. Currently, the number of cases on
stealing customer data is on the rise.
However, Sri Lanka lacks appropriate
laws to protect customer data. We
will, therefore, introduce a data
privacy and protection law which
governs the collection, use, and
disclosure of citizens’ personal data
by government and private sector
organizations.
Through this act, we will ensure that
all government organizations and
private sector firms which maintain
citizens’ data have adequate security
controls in place and make them
liable for privacy violations.

2.2.2.

2.3. | Data Sharing Policy
2.3.1. We will also introduce a data sharing
policy for government organizations

2.4. Baseline Security Standards
We will facilitate the Sri Lanka Standards
Institute to develop baseline information
and cyber security standards for information
systems, hardware, and software
applications.

2.5. Critical Infrastructure Protection Policy
We will introduce Critical Infrastructure
Protection Policy which will identify and
declare infrastructure as critical
infrastructure and provide measures.
necessary for protecting, safeguarding and
increasing resilience of critical infrastructure.

2.6. Information Security Policy
We will facilitate organizations to develop
security policies based on the maturity of
their information systems. The information
security policy of each organization shall be
developed aligning with international
standards.

Thrust # 3: Development of a
Competent Workforce

Our Strategy

Cyber-attacks and the disruptions to information
systems caused by these attacks are increasing
exponentially. In this context, it is necessary to
ensure the availability of a cadre of knowledgeable
and highly skilled professionals in the field of
information and cyber security domain to protect,
detect, defend and respond to these cyber-attacks.

In 2016, skills gap analysis from ISACA estimated a
global shortage of 2 million cybersecurity
professionals by 2019®. As per the GCI, Sri Lanka
requires to expend much effort on building overall
human resource capacity to combat emerging cyber
threats. In Sri Lanka, to date, there is a distinct lack
of initiatives to address the domestic shortage of
cybersecurity experts. We will, therefore, aim to
implement appropriate strategies to facilitate our
workforce to gain and maintain the knowledge,
skills, experience and technological capabilities
needed to effectively work in the cyber
environment.

Our strategy is to create a virtuous circle of
supply and demand of information and cyber
security experts through continuous
assessment of the gap between the supply and
demand of cyber professionals, increasing
learning opportunities to capitalize on cyber
security knowledge, and educating youth for
building a pool of future cybersecurity
professionals




INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

Our Initiatives

3.1. Assess Supply and Demand of
Professionals
We will conduct a national level survey to
understand the gap between the supply of
information and cybersecurity professionals
and demand from the industry for such
professionals in Sri Lanka. Such an analysis is
important for NICSA to formulate
appropriate strategies and policies to fill the
supply and demand gap.

3.2. | Competency Framework
3.2.1. We will develop a National

Information and Cyber Security
Competency Framework which
outlines the core competencies that
both the government and private
sector should possess to effectively
work in the cyber environment. In
developing the framework, carder
structure of the public service and
private sector would be taken into
account.

3.2.2. We will work with Tertiary and
Vocational Education Commission to
develop National Vocational
Qualification (NVQ) standards for
various disciplines in the Information
and Cyber Security domain. The
proposed National Information and
Cyber Security Competency
Framework shall comply with the
NVQ Standards and Professional
Qualification Standards as defined by
International Standardization bodies.

3.3. Up-Skilling and Re-Skilling Opportunities
for Public Sector Staff
A minimum NVQ standard will be
introduced as a qualification
requirement for each layer of staff in
the Information Technology service,
and in other services who are
involved with ICT initiatives.
We will also facilitate the organizing
of special training courses (based on
NVQ Standards) for the staff of
agencies maintaining critical
infrastructure, agencies dealing with
most vulnerable communities in our
society, law enforcement authorities,
Tri-forces and the Intelligence
Services.
As per Information and Cyber
Security Competency Framework, we
will roll out information and cyber
security training program for staff at
grass root level organizations in the
public service across the country.
We will offer scholarships for public
sector staff to undertake specialized
postgraduate degrees and to take up
professional courses in this domain.
We will include information and
cyber security for Confidence and
Efficiency Bar exams in public service.

3.3.1.

3.3.2.

3.3.3.

3.3.4.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

3.4. Expanding Tertiary and Vocational

Education

3.4.1. We will facilitate local universities,
vocational training institutes, and
private educational service providers
to introduce industry oriented
diplomas, undergraduate and post
graduate programs to provide
learning opportunities to students to
develop a solid foundation in both
theory and practice of information
security to advance their practical
cybersecurity skills.

3.4.2. Wewill facilitate private professional
entities/accreditation institutes to
award professional qualifications in
this domain.

3.8.

participation at such conferences would not
only help to capitalize on cybersecurity
expertise knowledge but also to build
networks with cyber security professionals
from around the globe. Through our
international partnerships and the External
Resource Department of Sri Lanka, we will
seek such opportunities for Chief Innovation
Officers (CIOs) and Chief Information
Security Officers of the public service.

Future Career Paths

3.8.1. We will advocate for inclusion of
information and cyber security into
the school curriculum with the aim of
creating a talented pool of cyber
security professionals in future.

3.8.2. We will facilitate career guidance

3.5. Training Infrastructure across the Country workshops at schools across the
3.5.1. We will facilitate private firms to country to raise awareness of the
develop information and cyber emerging career opportunities in this
security training infrastructure across domain. Students who are
the country by way of public private completing GCE A/L shall be the
partnership arrangements. target group.
3.5.2. We will empower government 3.8.3. Women are globally
training institutes (e.g. Sri Lanka underrepresented in the
Institute of Development cybersecurity profession. Globally it
Administration, Sri Lanka Institute of is at 11%, much lower than the
Local Governance) to conduct representation of women in the
information and cyber security overall global workforce Special
training for government staff. attention will be given to creating an
interest in cybersecurity among
3.6. _ e-Learning Modules female school students as there is
We will encourage the Distance Learning inadequate women participation in
Centre to design e-learning modules on this domain.
Cyber Security which government staff can
take up upon their convenience.
3.7. Opportunities for Government Staff to

Attend International Conferences
Continuous participation and contribution to
international conferences on information
security is essential to state our position and
deepen communications with various actors
around the world. We recognize that



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

Thrust # 4: Resilient Digital

Government Systems and Our strategy is to ensure that our digital

systems and digital infrastructure are resilient

Infrastructure to cyber threats, through implementing risk
management processes, implementing

Our Strategy appropriate security policies and strategies at
the organizational level, increasing awareness

Sri Lanka has advanced rapidly over the past decade and building the capacity of public sector staff

in developing various digital government initiatives. at all levels

Multimillion investments made on various digital
government initiatives have helped Sri Lanka to
advance from 101* (2008) to 79" position (2016) in
the e-Government Development Index’. To date
there are about 500 government websites and more
than 50 e-services facilitating citizens to obtain
services through the Internet. e-Administrative
applications have been developed by public
organizations that maintain critical infrastructure
with the aim of increasing the organizational
efficiency thereby providing better services for
citizens. Lanka Government Network, and Lanka
Government Cloud provide the necessary digital
infrastructure for e-services and e-administrative
services.

Although digital government initiatives promise
tremendous benefits for citizens and government,
they also bring threats of various cyberattacks such
as malware attacks, unauthorized access, and denial
of service attacks. Cyber-attacks on digital —— ——
government services can cause significant
disruptions to the public service delivery, and
thereby destroy public confidence. Our citizens will
not embrace digital government if their information 41. _ Information and Cyber Security Risk
cannot be securely kept in the government systems. Assessments

It is, therefore, essential to adopt appropriate
strategies to ensure security of digital government
systems and critical information infrastructure.

Our Initiatives

4.1.1. We will conduct a survey to identify
the organizations (both private and
public) which maintain critical
information systems. An inventory of
organizations shall be developed
based on the criticality of the
information infrastructure
maintained by the relevant
organization.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

4.2.

4.3.

4.1.2. Wewill facilitate relevant
stakeholders to conduct information
and cyber security risk assessments
to uncover weaknesses and
vulnerabilities in digital government
systems and infrastructure, and to
prioritize and implement appropriate
security controls to mitigate those
identified weaknesses.

Security Policy for Organizations that
Maintain Digital Government Systems
We will facilitate the organizations
maintaining digital government systems and
organizations maintaining critical
infrastructure to develop and implement the
Information Security Policy based on
international standards.

Digital Government Infrastructure

Protection Unit

4.3.1. To effectively defend the digital
government systems and
infrastructure from emerging threats,
we will setup the Digital Government
Infrastructure Protection Unit under
NICSA. This unit will be responsible
for detecting and analyzing cyber
threats and vulnerabilities,
disseminating cyber threat alerts,
and coordinating incident response
activities.

4.3.2. We will coordinate multi-sector
cybersecurity exercises with the
involvement of this unit. Through
these exercises, we aim to identify
vulnerabilities arising from cross-
sector interdependencies and stress-
test coordination and
communication across sectors.

4.4. Awareness and Capacity Building of Staff
Working with Digital Government

441.

44.2.

Some facts (2017)

It is widely believed that the
awareness of Sri Lankan public
officers on information and cyber
security should be improved. We will,
therefore, first conduct information
and cyber security readiness surveys
on public sector employees
periodically to assess their readiness
to work in a digital government
environment.

In line with the Competency
Framework, CIOs and Technical staff
working in digital government
environment will be empowered with
appropriate skills and knowledge on
information and cyber security.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

44.3. As per the Information and Cyber
Security Competency Framework
(Thrust Area 3), we will, conduct
information and cyber security
awareness activities across all levels
of government staff.

4.5. Chief Information Security Officer and

Information Security Officers

4.5.1. We will work with the Department of
Management Service to establish a
"Chief Information Security Officer”
position in the public service, which
will be the highest level position in
the information and cyber security
domain in the public service.

4.5.2. Depending on the usage of ICT
systems at public organizations, we
will appoint Information Security
Officers for government
organizations and develop their
capacity through comprehensive
knowledge building exercises.

4.6. Security-by-Design in Digital Government

Systems Development

4.6.1. Security-by-Design is a best practice
which can be adopted to secure
digital government upfront and
throughout its life cycle. By
integrating risk assessment into the
system development life cycle, trade-
offs between security, cost and
functionalities can be balanced. We
will encourage solution developers
to incorporate security-by-design
principles when developing digital
government systems and digital
infrastructure.

4.6.2. We will work with the National
Procurement Commission of Sri
Lanka to incorporate such conditions
to standard government bidding
documents.

Thrust # 5: Raising Awareness
and Empowerment of Citizens

Our Strategy

The Internet has become important for all aspects
of daily life including education, work, and
participation in society. A considerable segment of
society is becoming more and more dependent on
the Internet thereby becoming more vulnerable to
cybercrime. A major reason for such vulnerabilities
to cybercrime is lack of awareness among citizens
about possible cyber threats and their
consequences. Theft of identity, stealing of credit
card numbers, and privacy violation and
unauthorized access on social media for example
are commonly caused due to the lack of awareness
of citizens. It is, therefore, essential to raise citizens’
awareness about emerging cyber threats and
empower them with the knowledge and skills
necessary to defend themselves against evolving
cyber threats.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

Our strategy is to raise the awareness of
citizens about the risks derived from
cyberspace, and build their capacity to protect
their identity, privacy and economic assets in
the cyber space

Our Initiatives

5.1.

5.2.

National Information and Cyber Security
Readiness Survey

In collaboration with the Department of
Census and Statistics, we will conduct a
National Baseline Survey to assess Sri
Lankan citizens’ awareness, attitudes and
behaviors on cyber security related activities.

Public’s Awareness of Social Media and
Cyber Security

5.2.1.

5.2.2.

5.2.3.

5.2.4.

5.2.5.

We will extend the services of CERT
website to provide a comprehensive
collection of materials and activities
relating to cybersecurity, and
incorporate a comprehensive
complaints reporting system to assist
victims.

We will increase information and
cyber security awareness among the
public through hosting awareness
campaigns, organizing public
conferences, street dramas, and so
forth.

We will pay special attention to most
vulnerable communities in the
society including youth, women and
elderly people.

We will use printed and electronic
media to reach a broader population.
Content shall be in trilingual format.
We will also use social media as a
tool for increasing the information
security awareness of citizens.

We will also enhance the content of
well-known government web sites
(e.g. www.gov.lk,www.news.gov.Ik,
www. defence.gov.|k) with
information and cyber security
related materials (e.g. presentations,
and webinars). The Government Call
Centre (1919) will be also enhanced
to provide basic information on
cyber security related matters.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

5.3. Introduction of Information and Cyber

Security into Curriculums

5.3.1. We will facilitate the Ministry of
Education and the National Institute
of Education to include information
and cyber security as an essential
part of the informatics curriculum at
schools.
We will facilitate the Ministry of
Education to increase school
children’s awareness on cyber
security. We will also continue to
publish the Cyber Guardian
(newsletter on cybersecurity) and
circulate among school and
university students to increase their
awareness on latest cyber threats.

5.3.2.

5.4. Lifelong Learning Opportunities
With the involvement of Open University of
Sri Lanka and Vocational Training Institutes
we will design basic information and cyber
security learning modules for adults. We aim
to deliver these courses through the Open
University’s distance learning centres,
Nenasala Centres, vocational training
institutes and accredited training institutes
scattered around country.

5.5. Security Ratings for ICT Equipment and
Create Awareness Among Citizens
We will facilitate the Sri Lanka Standards
Institute to develop Security Ratings for ICT
products which will enable citizens to have a
clear idea of the level of security that a
product offers. We will also work with ICT
product suppliers’ associations to supply
products into the market by enabling
security settings by default. Through
effective communication channels we will
make citizens aware of security ratings and
security features of ICT products.

Thrust # 6: Development of
Public-Private, Local-
International Partnerships

Our Strategy

Sri Lankan cyber community as a part of the global
Internet community faces many vulnerabilities.
Social engineered Trojans attacks, malware attacks,
phishing attacks, advanced persistent threats,
botnets, ransomware, financial frauds for example
are increasingly posing many threats to the Sri
Lankan Internet community.

The government of Sri Lanka acknowledges that the
government alone cannot effectively combat these
threats. Collective efforts of end users, academics,
private sector hardware and software vendors,
Telcos and ISPs, private sector critical infrastructure
owners, are essential in battling against these cyber
threats. Moreover, cybersecurity cannot be achieved
by any one nation alone, and greater levels of
international cooperation is needed to confront
those actors who seek to disrupt or exploit our
networks.

Our strategy is to develop a mechanism for
cooperation extending beyond government
agencies to public-private collaboration, and
local- international collaboration in
developing a cybersecurity ecosystem




INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA
ee

6.2.

Our Initiatives

Partner with Telecommunication and ISPs

to Protect Internet Users

6.1.1. ISPs in Sri Lanka occupy a unique
position as the gateway to Sri
Lanka's cyberspace. We will,
therefore, set up a Telco-CERT with
the involvement of Telcos and ISPs
to effectively handle emerging cyber
threats. Telco-CERT would be
involved in tackling phishing attacks,
blocking malicious domains and IP
addresses, and deploying other
measures to disrupt malware attacks
including measures to secure the
telecommunications and Internet
routing infrastructure.

6.1.2. We will encourage ISPs to increase
their customers’ awareness on cyber
security risks, and best practices for
avoiding cyber threats.

6.3.

6.4.

IP Reputational Service

We will work with Telecommunication
Regulatory Authority of Sri Lanka (TRC) and
ISPs to determine the possibility of
maintaining an Internet Protocol Reputation
Service. This will facilitate online service
providers to obtain information about an IP
address to which they are connecting.
Through this service, spreading of harmful
content shall be minimized.

Partner with Firms Operating Critical
Information Infrastructure (CII) to Create
Resilience

Our systems depend on the critical
infrastructure information systems that are
owned by non-government actors. There are
many private companies which provide
critical services to the general public in the
domains of finance, power and energy,
transport, aviation, health and so forth.
Although the government is not responsible
for securing the critical information
infrastructure owned by private firms, it is
essential to support these private firms to
protect their information infrastructure
where a damage to the information
infrastructure would interrupt the day-to-
day lives of citizens. We will therefore, work
closely with Critical Infrastructure owners
and operators to expand initiatives to secure
the CII ecosystem, preserve the benefits of
cyberspace, and avoid unnecessary
impediments to technological evolution.

Empower Sectoral Ministries Maintaining
Digital Government Systems

The primary responsibility of safeguarding
security in each sector's digital government
systems and infrastructure, and of ensuring
adequate preventive measures against cyber
threats lies with the sectoral ministries. This
means that each sectoral ministry has a
responsibility of identifying critical
infrastructure in their sector, and ensuring



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

adequate security by assessing, determining
and implementing preventive measures in
their sector.

6.5. Work with Military Establishments to
Establish a Joint Military Security
Operation Centre/Defence CERT
Sri Lankan Militaries, Police, and Intelligence
Services all work separately in confronting
malicious cyber actors. However, there is a
lack of coordination among these
organizations to share valuable information
on cyber threats. In this context, with the
involvement of relevant authorities, we will
establish a joint Cyber Security Operations
Centre/Defence CERT with a focus on
strengthening our cyber defences and
ensuring that our defence forces are able to
continue to operate securely. The creation of
a single unified military security operations
centre would provide better capabilities to
speedily overcome challenges presented by
operating in cyberspace.

6.6. Promote Cooperation with Industry

Sectors

6.6.1. We will encourage industry sectors
to work together in order to jointly
improve detection, prevention,
response and recovery capabilities.
We will develop a channel to share
real-time sensitive information on
cyber threats and potential
consequences with industry sectors.
We will also develop a mechanism to
share information on cyber threats
and vulnerabilities with medium size
businesses, which are currently
increasingly being victimized by
malicious actors in the cyber space.
Tailored alerts and advice will be
generated for them.

6.6.2.

6.7.

6.8.

Strengthening International Partnerships
Through effective operational links between
countries and across the region, we will
engage with the international community to
build a system of cyberspace stability. We
will sign agreements with international
organizations such as International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), The
European Union Agency for Network and
Information Security (ENISA), Asia Pacific
Computer Emergency Response Team
(APCERT), Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN), Forum for
Incident Response Security Teams (FIRST),
United Nations Internet Governance Forum
(UNIGF), Internet Society (ISOC),
International Watch and Warning Network
(IWWN), and the International Criminal
Police Organization (Interpol) for
exchanging technical information on threats
and vulnerabilities, obtaining latest software
and hardware products, conducting joint
cyber drills, and building the capacity of the
staff.

Budapest Convention

On 1st September 2015, Sri Lanka ratified
the Council of Europe’s Convention on
Cybercrime (Budapest Convention) and
became the first country in South Asia to
become a party to the Convention. The
Budapest Convention is the only
international legally binding treaty on
Cybercrime in the world today and seeks to
harmonize national laws, adopt improved
investigative powers based on international
standards, enhance criminal justice
cooperation among State Parties in order to
effectively combat the threat against
cybercrime °. We will take initiatives to
implement and comply with the Budapest
Convention requirements and will
continuously work with member countries to
build a secure cyber space.



INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF SRI LANKA

6.9. Increase our Presence at International

Level

We will enhance our presence at the

international level through participation in

international forums and conferences on
cyber security and through playing an active
role in knowledge gaining and sharing
exercises.

6.10. Partner with Businesses to Promote

Security in Products and Services

We will work with suppliers to bring

products and services to the market with a

high level of security to ensure the privacy

and security of customer information.

6.11. Partner with Universities to build a Cyber

Security Research Culture

6.11.1. We will work with Universities in Sri
Lanka to promote a cybersecurity
research culture in Sri Lanka.

6.11.2. In partnership with donors and
universities, we will introduce
research grant schemes for students
undertaking research on cyber
security.

6.11.3. With the partnership of all
stakeholders in this domain we will
continue to host an annual national
cybersecurity week followed by a
national cyber security conference.

6.12. Support of Government Organizations,

Social Groups and NGOs

6.12.1. With the involvement of government
stakeholders including the Ministry
of Social Empowerment and Welfare,
Ministry of Women and Child Affairs,
the Child Protection Authority, and
Ministry of Law and Order we will
increase the awareness of rural
communities, and most vulnerable
communities in our society on cyber
security.

6.13.

6.12.2. With the involvement of groups in
the civil society (e.g. SMART Social
Circles, Nenasala Centres,
Community Centres), and NGOs, we
will increase rural and semi urban
citizens’ awareness on cyber security,
and help and guide citizens towards
safe, enjoyable experiences online.

Nurture Start-ups

We aim to support entrepreneurs to
establish cyber security startups. We will
nurture start-ups to boost the development
of niche solutions and grow local champions
to sustain strategic areas of interest. In
partnerships with Sri Lanka Software
Exporters Association, we will develop
market opportunities to bring made-in-Sri
Lanka solutions into the global market.

End Notes

1.

10.

https://wwwstatista.com/statistics/387857/
number-cyber-security-incidents-worldwide/
https://www,juniperresearch.com/press/press-
releases/cybercrime-cost-businesses-over-
2trillion
http://www.statistics.gov.Ik/education/Comput
erLiteracy/ComputerLiteracy-2017Q1-Q2-
final.pdf
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Doc
uments/UNPAN96407. pdf
https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en
-us/Reports/UN-E-Government-Survey-2010
https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-d/opb/str/D-
STR-GCI.01-2017-PDF-E.pdf

http://www. internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm
https://image-
store.slidesharecdn.com/be4eafla-eea6-4b97-
b36e-b62dfc8dcbae-original.jpeg
https://rm.coe.int/16806bdcd8
https://iamcybersafe.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/WomensReport.pdf



Sri Lanka CERT | CC

Room 4-112, BMICH,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 07, Sri Lanka.
Tel: +94 11 269 1692 / 269 5749 / 267 9888
Fax: +94 11 2691064

E-mail: cert@cert.gov.lk

www.cert.gov.1k

SRI LANKA COMPUTER EMERGENCY READINESS TEAM | COORDINATION CENTRE




