2019 
 
 
 
 
 
LEBANON NATIONAL 
CYBER SECURITY 
STRATEGY 
 
Towards year 2022 
"Lebanon wants to have a secure and stable cyberspace, 
both within the national territory and in international exchanges." 
 

 
Table of Contents 
 
Message from the Prime Minister ................................................................................................ 4 
Preamble .......................................................................................................................................... 6 
PART I. LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY .............................. 7 
1. Lebanon strategic context ...................................................................................................... 8 
1.1 What has been achieved ................................................................................................... 11 
1.2 Threats ................................................................................................................................ 13 
1.3 Trend of threats ................................................................................................................. 14 
1.4 Challenges........................................................................................................................... 15 
2. The State responsible for Cyber Security .......................................................................... 19 
2.1 Government ....................................................................................................................... 19 
2.2 Businesses and organizations ........................................................................................... 20 
2.3 Individuals as citizens, employees and consumers ....................................................... 20 
3. Pillars of the National Cyber Security Strategy ................................................................. 21 
3.1 Defend, deter, and reinforce against threats .................................................................. 22 
3.2 Develop international cooperation in Cyber Security .................................................. 26 
3.3 Reinforcement of State capacities to support the development of ICT .................... 27 
3.4 Promote educational capacity on the Lebanese territory ............................................. 28 
3.5 Promote industrial and technical capacity ..................................................................... 31 
3.6 Support the export and internationalization of Cyber Security companies .............. 31 
3.7 Strengthen collaboration between the public and private sectors .............................. 32 
3.8 The role of Law Enforcement Agencies ........................................................................ 33 
4. Objectives .............................................................................................................................. 35 
PART II. INSTITUTIONALIZATION –  THE NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY 
AND INFORMATION SYSTEM AGENCY (NCSIA) ...................................................... 39 
5. The Institutionalization of a National Agency for Cyber Security ................................. 40 
5.1 The NCISA’s mandate at the national level .................................................................. 40 
5.2 The NCISA and the public – from individuals to companies .................................... 42 
5.3 The NCISA’s involvement in the qualification and monitoring of products ........... 42 
5.4 The Agency facing Cyber Threats ................................................................................... 43 
5.5 The NCISA and the protection of Operators of Vital Importance (OVI) ............... 43 

 
5.6 The normative framework of the Agency and its ecosystem ...................................... 44 
6. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 46 
ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................................ 48 
GLOSSARY .................................................................................................................................. 49 
ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................... 55 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
4 
 
Message from the Prime Minister 
 
 
In today's increasingly connected global world, we are witnessing 
exploding growth of the digital tool, a source of opportunities and 
prosperity, but also a potential threat to our security. Indeed, Cyber 
Attacks are increasingly frequent and sophisticated, which is a real 
challenge for our country: How to become resilient to the risks of 
Cyber Space while allowing users the freedom to use a safe and 
trustworthy space? But also, how to put that trust in place? Trust in 
the use of personal data and more particularly of sensitive data. 
Trust in the systems that produce, host, or distribute them. 
Ultimately, trust in all stakeholders, companies, partners, suppliers, 
public services, states, whose digital existence has a genuine impact on the lives of our 
fellow citizens. 
There is no digital transformation without trust and there can be no trust without 
Cyber Security. 
A Cyber Security strategy is therefore an obvious priority, especially that Lebanon is a 
signatory to the Paris Call1 and remains committed of the need to secure its Cyber Space 
in the cooperation framework with all its international partners.  
In the course of preparation of this Strategy, we placed special emphasis on 
implementing an open and interdepartmental process to involve stakeholders from many 
public sectors, namely the security services and the judicial branch. Thus, a National 
Committee was created by Resolution 173, under the direction of the General Secretariat 
of the High Council of Defense, and Resolution 172 allowing the appointment of a 
National Coordinator for Cyber Security, all under the authority of the Prime Minister. 
The Committee participated actively and intensively in workshops and conferences, in 
exploratory visits organized by the European Union delegation to Lebanon, to European 
expert missions. In addition, it implemented an academic collaboration with the Lebanese 
University and Saint-Joseph University, indicating that there is great interest in finding 
common solutions. I express my gratitude to all those who contributed to this process. 
                                              
 
1 On 12 November at the UNESCO Internet Governance Forum (IGF), President Emmanuel Macron launched the Paris Call 
for Trust and Security in Cyberspace. This high-level declaration in favour of the development of common principles for 
securing cyberspace has already received the backing of 552 official supporters: 66 States, 139 international and civil society 
organizations, and 347 entities of the private sector. 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
5 
 
This work has provided certainty and showed us how it is done: The creation and 
institutionalization of an Agency at the national level, under the authority of the 
Presidency of the Council of Ministers and attached to the General Secretariat of the 
Higher Council of Defense, seems essential. The Agency will be the authority responsible 
for securing the information systems and fighting against Cyber Crime. It will also 
guarantee our protection against Cyber Attacks by implementing our strategy throughout 
the national territory and will contribute maintaining our digital sovereignty. 
But this undertaking would be fruitless if we do not perform at the same time a 
significant effort to raise the awareness of our fellow citizens on the daily risks of the use 
of digital tools and if we do not encourage the professional training of the key actors. I 
think the sentence should stop here from a grammatical point of view. If you want to 
keep the same meaning then it has to be reformulated who will be in charge of protecting 
the nation in Cyber Space. 
My project is ambitious: To guarantee a minimum of security for our fellow citizens 
and for the well-functioning of our democracy and to ensure that this strategy is 
collectively carried by all the stakeholders in Lebanon as part of an effort at the national 
and international levels. 
Today it is necessary to develop a broad cooperation between public authorities, the 
private sector, and civil society. I therefore appeal to the whole nation for all the 
stakeholders to participate in this collective effort and for the implementation of this 
strategy to be effective and beneficial to the interests of our Country. 
 
 
 
Saad Hariri 
PRIME MINISTER 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
6 
 
Preamble 
 
At its creation, the Internet was intended as a tool to be put at the service of humanity 
within the framework of a freely accessible platform for the universal sharing of 
information and knowledge, outside the confines of traditional geographical boundaries. 
If this goal has been achieved, it must be recognized that the evolution in digital 
technologies has also increased the risks associated with this space. Cyber Space is indeed 
a virtual space for the expression of power and strength, for cultural, political, military, 
and economic tensions. As such, it is constantly evolving in the construction of current 
international relations. 
Today, our daily lives, our social interactions, and our economies depend on the 
reliability, transparency, and security of information and communication technologies. 
However, it turns out that Lebanon, like all other States, faces many threats in Cyber 
Space (Cyber Crime, espionage, sabotage, blackmail or fraudulent or excessive use of 
personal data), which undermines trust and security in Cyber Space. 
In this context, the primary responsibility of the Lebanese State is therefore to 
provide Cyber Security solutions to current and future challenges, and to create an open 
and free Cyber Space, respectful of democracy while it is protected, to bring security to 
the public sector, the private sector, and citizens. From this observation arose the 
necessity to create, in 2018, a National Committee with the objective to set up a National 
Cyber Security Strategy. The Strategy we present here is the result of this intensive 
collective work and is the cornerstone of the national security of our society, which will 
inevitably become ever more digitalized, and must therefore serve the common good of 
all actors in the Lebanese society.  
It is a bold and ambitious approach that Lebanon has set for itself. The objectives of 
this approach are to regulate Lebanon’s Cyber Space, to position the human element at 
the center of its responsibilities, to go through the awareness of building a national 
collective effort on home front, and to reach a stronger cooperation at the international 
level. 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I. 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY 
STRATEGY 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
8 
 
1. Lebanon strategic context 
Lebanon stands in the midst of all the advancement in the technology that we are 
currently witnessing. By relying on modest and insecure digitization, Lebanon is exposed 
to disruption, which targets its security as well as the safety and privacy of its citizens. 
The lack of a unified and clear Cyber Security strategy across different public sector 
bodies and private organizations makes it difficult to defend and prevent such attacks. 
Considering the vulnerabilities, data breaches, and all the different attacks that 
some Lebanese entities suffered, especially during the year 2018, and for the ease 
with which attackers were able to gain access to different entities in the public 
and private sectors, the need for Cyber Security in Lebanon is becoming an urgency 
along with the necessity to fight malicious cyber behavior and maintain a good standard 
of data security and system integrity.  
Despite the timid attempts by some institutions and entities at securing their data and 
systems, the initiatives implemented in Lebanon were greatly insufficient to accomplish 
the desired goal. These efforts need to be integrated in a collaborative approach, 
following a well-defined strategy that better defends against attacks and counters Cyber 
Crime. The unorganized efforts of today, in the field of Cyber Security in Lebanon are 
not achieving the desired results. Below are some of the reasons that explain the current 
situation: 
 The absence of a unified National Cyber Security Strategy: Every institution 
in both the private and public sectors has its own security vision and procedures, 
which might be efficient in their current situations but makes it more difficult to 
collaborate without well-defined criteria, KPIs, and, most importantly, 
information sharing and a common framework at the highest level. 
 The absence of laws and regulations that govern cybercrimes: Lebanon lacks 
laws and regulations that protect government institutions, private companies, and 
cyber rights of individuals. It also has no clear definitions for criminal acts and the 
consequences and implications of these criminal acts lack clarity. 
 The absence of a National Cyber Security Agency: Lebanon does not have a 
Cyber 
Security 
Agency 
that 
implements 
and 
enforces 
Cyber 
Laws; 
employs/utilizes people with the required level of expertise to assist organizations 
set up their security frameworks; offers trainings; supports research and 
development; and guarantees the continuity of Cyber Security awareness 
programs. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
9 
 
 The struggle between corruption and the digital economy: In 2018, Lebanon 
maintained its ranking within the upper range of corrupt nations, a situation held 
since the early 1990s and that can be attributed to the consequences of the 
sectarian war. An entire generation grew up living in a society that lacked structure 
and order. Instead of restoring the traditional, pre-war Lebanese culture built on 
integrity, respect, and competence, this generation came out of this war 
rationalizing its need to satiate its hunger in compensation for years of 
deprivation. 
Corruption and the digital economy are diametrically opposed since corruption is 
the major threat against the implementation of Cyber Security, while the digital 
economy can potentially destroy or at best disrupt corruption patterns. 
Corrupt agents could become implicated in active or passive, direct or indirect, 
and internal or external cyber-attacks intended to disable the services provided 
through the digital infrastructure of the national digital economy. Their aim could 
be to allege the inefficiency of the digital services provided in order to fall back on 
the previous manual operations, under which corruption schemes could not be 
tracked. 
 The multi-faceted socio-demographic context: The Lebanese Constitution is 
based on a democracy that preserves the equity of rights amongst its multiple 
religious communities. Multiplicity is a unique and distinctive component of the 
nation which may be used to destabilize every single area of the public and civic 
life. As a consequence, cooperation, sharing of means, and the use of appropriate 
qualifications can be hampered if the multiple entities that make up the Lebanese 
society veer towards isolationism and individualism, which would in turn drain the 
nation from the necessary skills required for well-functioning institutions and 
affect the overall resilience built on collaboration across agencies. 
To avoid this end, individuals appointed to positions of responsibility should 
possess expertise or be required to obtain a certification in the related business 
area. This directive reflects mandatory Cyber Security requirements. 
Cyber-Attacks are similar to a virus infecting an organ of a living body. If left 
untreated or treated inadequately, it will endanger the entire body, and could 
spread to other individuals, to contaminate and potentially decimate an entire 
population. 
To eradicate the spread of such a potential threat to the entire nation, action 
should be coordinated through involving all relevant stakeholders, using a wide 
range of enforcement tools and reliable expertise. 
In summary, the state must ensure that people appointed for the implementation 
of the Cyber Security Strategy shall be competent, reliable, experienced, 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
10 
 
responsible for upholding the common interest and promoting the common good, 
and motivated by a powerful sense of patriotism.  
 The lack of collaboration mandates between administrations at the national 
level: Every institution is working on its security separately without a clear 
framework of collaboration with other institutions. Institutions would benefit 
from sharing and exchanging information and data. In addition, there is a lack of 
collaboration and cooperation across the different departments of the same 
institution, especially in the field of security. Each department and unit act and 
work 
independently 
rather 
than 
cooperating 
to 
secure 
the 
overall 
organization/institution. 
 The lack of active participation of the private sector in the advancement of 
the public sector: The public sector lacks a regulatory role and awareness-
building system and relies on the private sector to cover the shortage in experience 
and development capacity of its IT departments and positions, and to secure and 
provide IT-related and Cyber Security services. It is important for the public 
sector to outsource such services. However, the Lebanese public sector came out 
weaker from such collaboration with the private sector. Records show that the 
private sector did not successfully or adequately manage handing over these IT 
projects to the public sector and it did not benefit as it should have from the 
completion of such projects. This should be addressed in any future partnerships 
with the private sector and/or international cooperation in order to ensure 
constructive outcomes. 
 The absence of an initiative for a National Information System and Digital 
Transformation Strategy at the highest level: Despite all the efforts exerted 
independently or through OMSAR in e-government and automation projects 
since 1995 in various ministries, Lebanon continues to fall short on developing a 
nation-wide vision with a cooperative inter-institutional approach. There is an 
evident and serious imbalance between institutions and ICT coordination is not 
institutionalized at the highest level, which makes detecting, identifying, and 
managing Cyber Security-related incidents very difficult. Within such an 
environment, the effective use of Cyber Security and Cyber Defense to protect 
citizens, and public or private organizations targeted by Cyber Attacks becomes 
seriously compromised. 
 The shortage of Cyber Security experts and the difficulty to adapt to rapid 
changes: Administrative bodies, companies, and universities in Lebanon are in 
desperate need of developing awareness and creating a well-structured and 
balanced Cyber Security atmosphere by targeting educational and training 
programs at all levels (universities, jobs, conferences, etc.), to be ready to respond 
to the rapid development in the nature of Cyber Crimes and the methods used. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
11 
 
Unfortunately, Cyber Security trainings are limited to some areas in educational 
organizations, communities, or in some universities or other educational 
programs. Students tend to rely on self-education in this field rather than seek 
formal education and training programs that would provide them with the 
necessary tools to feed all the sectors that require such talent in Lebanon’s 
exposed industries.  
Lebanon and its institutions are exposed to threats and Cyber Crimes like any 
other country. Cyber Security in Lebanon is not properly structured at the nation-
wide level and lacks the cooperation and coordination between organizations in 
the public and private sectors and at the international level to secure its citizens’ 
basic needs for safety and privacy. 
Today, many Lebanese institutions provide online services to various clients, who 
thus become dependent on the Internet. However, Internet use is not secure, and 
users will always be exposed to attempts of Cyber Attacks. Although this risk 
cannot be eliminated completely, it can be significantly reduced by restricting the 
attack surface and mitigating the spread of attacks to a level that would allow 
society to continue to prosper and benefit from the huge opportunities that the 
digital technology offers. 
1.1 What has been achieved 
In 2006, the Cybercrime Bureau of the Judicial Police of the Internal Security Forces was 
established. It was assigned the dual role of investigating complaints, Cyber Security 
breaches, and technology related crimes under the supervision of the Judicial Authorities, 
and of providing basic awareness to public and educational institutions on the latest 
Cyber Threats and Cyber Attacks. 
Other Security and Intelligence Services have worked extensively to strengthen their 
investigative capabilities in order to prevent threats to national security, including Cyber 
Attacks and Cyber Espionage. 
In 2010, the Lebanese Prime Minister established a National Commission, comprising 
representatives of major governmental and security agencies. The main function of this 
National Committee was to develop a national strategy for Cyber Security and fight 
against Cyber Crimes. Nine years following such a decision, the rapid growth and 
continuous evolution of the technology industry, Cyber Security approaches and best 
practices, and the proliferation of attack and defense techniques make this special and 
unique subject critical and more and more complicated to address.  
It is necessary to give shape to the National Cyber Security Strategy in order to define 
the effective actions to be taken by the above-mentioned National Commission.  

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
12 
 
From a practical and operational perspective, compared to the 2010 approach, the 
strategy now needs to focus on: making it a requirement that Cyber Security becomes a 
mandatory, legally binding and enforceable target for the Lebanon’s information system 
infrastructure at large; enhancing the Cyber Defense capabilities of our Country against 
the many different malicious  Cyber Crimes and Cyber Attacks; and outlining the 
structure of a centralized body placed under the authority of the Presidency of the 
Council of Ministers, which will be responsible for implementing the components of this 
strategy. 
In 2018, the Lebanese Parliament ratified Law number 81, “Law of electronic 
transactions”, which contains a chapter on the preservation of electronic evidence. 
Some universities in Lebanon have restructured their curricula and opened Master’s 
degree programs in Cyber Security and digital forensics. 
Lebanon has also cooperated with other ICT-advanced countries and International 
Organizations in the field of Cyber Security. 
A digital transformation strategy on the State level is being developed under the 
supervision of OMSAR. 
In 2018 and 2019, under the framework of the CyberSouth project which was 
organized by the Council of Europe, the Ministry of Justice trained around 20 judges on 
how to face Cyber Criminality.  Though it is in the right direction, this effort is not 
sufficient and the Ministry of Justice needs to address the subject on the highest level. 
The Ministry of Telecommunications is playing a major role in the deployment of a 
decently effective infrastructure in an intensive collaboration with private operators and 
OGERO, and regularly addresses Cyber Security issues with national stakeholders. It has 
established coordinating efforts with ITU (International Telecommunication Union) to 
improve the Cyber Security index in Lebanon. 
Banque du Liban (BDL) has developed and implemented, in a continuous 
improvement approach, a mature, standard-based, advanced and innovative Cyber 
Security Program that permits BDL to anticipate and defeat Cyber Attacks. This program 
is composed of two main pillars, and follows continuously the latest Worldwide IT 
Security Best Practices and Standards: 
 The Security Governance & Compliance Part: the first pillar contains the 
Definition & Update of BDL IT Security Roadmap, elaboration and follow-up of 
IT Security Policies, proactive risk assessment & management, and the launching 
and evaluation of the Security Awareness program. 
 The Defense-in-Depth Security Approach: is composed of multi-layered, multi-
technology security solutions, covering the Network & Endpoint Security 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
13 
 
Infrastructure, the Application Security Intelligence, and the Advanced & 
Intelligent Security Operations. 
Many Lebanese organizations, both in the public and private sectors, have witnessed 
and still face, at an alarmingly growing rate, Cyber Attacks that mainly target their 
websites and putting them out of service. Other types of attacks have resulted in the 
public disclose and release of some personal records of Lebanese citizens.  
1.2 Threats 
Malicious cyber activities are designed to compromise the confidentiality, the integrity, 
and the availability of Networks, IT Systems, and Information. 
Malicious cyber activities have some common characteristics: they have no 
boundaries; they cannot be easily attributed; and they do not necessarily require huge 
budgets and/or high technical skills. Moreover, different actors can put in place these 
threats, knowingly or unknowingly, making the range of malicious cyber activities even 
more difficult to detect, identify, and manage.  
The main threats can be classified as follows, based on who launches and how the 
attack is carried out: 
 Cyber-dependent crimes, where ICT devices can constitute both the main tool 
for committing the crime and the main target of the crime itself. The most 
relevant examples are developing and propagating malware for financial gain; 
hacking to steal sensitive data; DDoS; ransomware and blackmailing; or damaging, 
altering, or destroying data. Money is generally the main goal of such threats.  
 Cyber-enabled crimes, where computers are used to commit traditional crimes. 
The main activities are Cyber-enabled fraud, data theft, espionage, robberies, 
extortion, propaganda, or destruction. 
These Cyber Crimes can emanate from other countries and regions but also from 
inside the country and generally seek to obtain money or data for use in other 
malicious actions. 
 States and State-sponsored threats, where foreign States or entities sponsored 
by foreign States attempt to penetrate the Cyber Space, a public or a private 
network, or sensitive files on Cloud networks. The purpose is to gain political, 
diplomatic, military, technological, commercial, financial, and strategic advantage. 
In particular, these activities target critical national infrastructures of a country, 
such as defense, finance, energy, health, utilities, and telecommunications assets. 
Main activities include developing Cyber Espionage and destruction operations 
capabilities rather than using off-the-shelf techniques. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
14 
 
 Terrorists threats, where terrorist organizations make use of the Internet in order 
to perform the following: 
 Publicity/advertising and propaganda; 
 Recruiting and mobilization; 
 Fundraising; 
 Secure networking; encrypted / anonymous sharing of information; 
 Remote training; 
 Planning and coordination; 
 Claiming responsibility for attacks, thus showcasing their capabilities as an 
intimidation technique; 
 Using the Internet with continuously improved skills, by flooding the 
targets. 
Terrorist groups continue to aspire to conduct damaging Cyber activities against 
Lebanon. 
 Hacktivist threats, where activities mainly have a disruptive and criminal 
purpose to their victims. Such actors use the Internet with the same purposes as 
terrorist organizations. 
 Insider threats, where these constitute a continuous risk. They are committed by 
malicious insiders, who are implicitly “trusted” employees of an organization and 
who may have access to critical systems and data. These threats can cause financial 
and reputational damage through the theft of sensitive data and intellectual 
property. They can also pose a destructive Cyber Threat if they use privileged 
knowledge or access to facilitate or launch an attack to disrupt critical services on 
the network of their organization or wipe out data from the network. 
Some insider threats can be victims of social engineering and thus cause 
unintentional damage.  
 Script kiddies, where inexperienced actors use scripts or tools developed by 
others – and/or downloaded from the Internet – to conduct Cyber Attacks. They 
generally have access to hacking guides, resources and tools available on the 
internet and downloadable from public open sources.  
 Computer network attack, where hostile actors can use malicious software (or 
malware) to disrupt and damage cyber infrastructure. This can range from taking a 
website offline to manipulating industrial process command and control systems. 
1.3 Trend of threats 
The continuous and rapid development of information and communication technologies, 
globalization, the tremendous increase in data volumes, and the growing number of 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
15 
 
various devices and equipment connected to data networks have made a great impact on 
daily life, on the economy, and on the functioning of the State. In addition, the Internet is 
becoming increasingly accessible, the number of users continues to grow, and new 
technological services and solutions such as Internet of Things (IoT), Industrial Internet 
of Things (IIoT) and cloud services are on the rise. All the above result in a wider threat 
landscape and in a growth of attack vectors that have increased complexity, 
sophistication, and damages when successful. 
The number of State Actors involved in Cyber Space and engaged in Cyber 
Espionage activities targeting computers connected to the Internet as well as closed 
networks continues to grow. This reality is due to the fact that collecting information on 
national security as well as economic assets represents an important resource in the 
regional and international arena. The number and activeness of Nations capable to 
perform State-sponsored Cyber Attacks are increasing, posing unknown and unexpected 
critical threats and risks to Lebanon. 
In addition to the activeness of State actors, politically-motivated individuals and 
groups with limited financial means have a growing ability to organize their activities 
using social networks and carry out Denial of Service and other types of attacks. 
Moreover, the recent but fast-growing diffusion and implementation of encryption 
standards by governmental institutions and private companies – such as the SSL or the 
SSH protocols, just to mention a couple – revealed an unexpected side effect: They 
rendered real-time detection, post-incident analysis, defense, and investigation much 
more complex. Under some specific circumstances and ICT architectures, such as very 
large and complex data centers, it is becoming nearly impossible to perform real-time 
detection successfully.  
Nowadays, such scenarios are allowing different Threat Actors massively to exfiltrate 
sensitive and critical information using the very same encryption protocols that the 
victims use to enhance their Cyber Security.  
Very often this causes previously used detection and data protection solutions, such 
as DLP (Data Leakage Prevention), to fail in their core scope, usually greatly broadening 
the so-called “attack window” and resulting in increased and long-lasting data breaches, 
instead of the previously totally undetected, shorter breaches. The rapid evolution in the 
profile and capabilities of attackers makes tracing and attributing the attack drastically 
more complex. 
1.4 Challenges 
The main Cyber Security risks arise from the extensive and growing dependence on ICT 
infrastructure and e-services by the Lebanese State, economy, and population.  

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
16 
 
Cyber Crime undermines the functioning of the economic space and reduces trust in 
digital services. Therefore, competent personnel and modern technical tools are needed 
in order to ensure prevention, detection, and prosecution of Cyber Crime. Operational 
information exchange among countries is becoming increasingly important in the fight 
against Cyber Crime. 
In order to prevent and deter future security threats, it is necessary to constantly 
develop know-how related to Cyber Security and to invest in technological infrastructures 
and solutions.  
One of the main challenges is to develop a modern legal framework and to 
strengthen the means of the LEA (Law Enforcement Agencies: Army, Internal 
Security Forces, General Security and State Security) in order to provide a brand new, 
complete, and mixed legal and technical approach, with the main goal of allowing to 
clearly target penal responsibilities throughout the investigation phases, while 
implementing actions and measures to counter Cyber Crimes efficiently.  
This new legal framework shall include both high-level and low-level processes, the 
most important of which are the application of Digital Forensics science by default and 
the mandatory compliance with the “chain of custody” best practices and logical concept 
within all the possible types of digital evidence. The above shall then be used in all the 
different possible crime scenes and scenarios, such as Host Forensics, Mainframe 
Forensics, Network Forensics, GPS Forensics, Cloud Forensics, Mobile Forensics, 
Drone Forensics, Industrial Automation Forensics, Audio & Video Forensics, and IoT 
Forensics. The overall goal of the technical aspects of the new legal framework is always 
to preserve the digital evidence from regular and ICT based crime scenes. 
At the national level, it is possible to use the capabilities and know-how of the 
Banking Sector in terms of Cyber Security and Cyber Defense measures. At the 
international level, it is mandatory to strengthen Lebanon’s relations with trusted partners 
and develop new cooperative networks with other countries in order to improve the 
Lebanese economy and share security interests. Since threats are global, the defense must 
also be global, via strong cooperation with international professional bodies. No country 
is able to deal with Cyber Threats on its own. International cooperation is mandatory in 
accordance with Lebanese legal provisions. 
The Government should be able to raise Cyber Security standards across the country 
and enforce proper security measures to ensure that individuals, organizations, and 
businesses adapt their behaviors to the required security patterns in order to operate 
safely on the Internet.  
From a technical perspective, Cyber Crime and Cyber Attacks exploit the evolution of 
technology and the lack of a proper Cyber Security strategy and its factual 
implementation. In particular, we can identify five main challenges that could represent a 
concrete threat if not properly managed: 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
17 
 
 An expanding range of targeted devices 
The Internet of Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) create new 
opportunities for exploitation and increase the potential impact of attacks, which 
can cause both ICT and physical damage, and even death. The rapid 
implementation of connectivity in Industrial Control Processes in critical systems 
across a wide range of industries, such as energy, mining, agriculture, and aviation, 
has created the Industrial Internet of Things. This process allows devices and 
industrial and non-industrial operations, which were never vulnerable to such 
interferences in the past, to be hacked and tampered with, leading to potentially 
disastrous consequences. 
 Poor Cyber Hygiene and Compliance 
These two elements depend on and can be addressed through the adequate 
technical solutions and implementations. However, they also heavily rely on 
cultural awareness. In fact, without a proper understanding of the importance of 
the concept of Cyber Hygiene, neither defense solutions nor compliance with 
existing or upcoming Cyber Security standards would be sufficient. 
If not enough awareness is raised, maintained, and nourished at the widest 
national level, across all the public and private institutions of the country, and 
amongst individual citizens, the country and all its infrastructures will never be 
safe from threats. The below list of facts and scenarios gives an idea of possible 
risks and their consequences if the Government, across all its institutions, the 
public and private institutions, at large, do not take full awareness of the 
seriousness of the threats: 
 99% of Exploit-Based Attacks will still not be based on 0-Day 
Vulnerabilities. This means that, for example, if citizens do not understand 
the importance of very simple, basic security actions, such as “Windows 
Update” and if they do not apply them properly and regularly, their 
computers will always be prone to mass-attacks that will exploit known and 
public vulnerabilities; 
 Home Networks in Work-From-Home scenarios will expose Enterprises 
to BYOD-like Security Risks. The employee working from home must 
understand the importance of simple best practices, such as changing the 
default password on his/her home router, rather than always using VPNs 
in order to remotely connect to his/her office; 
 Sextortion Cases will rise dramatically; 
 The skills gap will widen and fewer trained experts will be available to fill 
security roles. Such lack in human resources will result in improper/poor 
testing, auditing, and certifying Cyber Security compliances in different 
environments and under different scenarios. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
18 
 
 Insufficient training and skills 
The gap in Cyber skills is a national vulnerability that needs to be resolved. There 
is a lack in the following: 
 Skills and knowledge to meet Cyber Security across both the public and 
private sectors; 
 Awareness building and formal training in Cyber Security for all public 
employees, who deal, in any form, with IT systems; 
 Hands-on training and simulations on the actual implementation of Cyber 
Security defense measures and techniques. 
 Legacy and unpatched systems 
 Using vulnerable legacy systems with no updated versions means having 
unpatched systems that make entire networks vulnerable to attacks leading 
to massive data breaches, allowing the attackers to steal thousands, if not 
millions, of personal and business data; 
 Using unsupported software for which updates and patching no longer 
exist leads to an increased level of vulnerability that might be used by 
attackers to succeed in their criminal operations. 
 Availability of hacking resources  
 Widely available free hacking information and hacking tools on the 
Internet give hackers access to knowledge and know-how that can be used 
for criminal purposes. This is something that cannot be combated, since 
the Internet itself is intrinsically designed for sharing information of any 
kind, both legal and not.  
 The availability of such information and hacking resources cannot be 
considered a crime (thus not allowing the blacklisting of such data), 
because most of the time, such know-how, tools, and how-to guides are (or 
claim to be) meant to foster knowledge about Cyber Security and security 
testing, even though in some cases they may be used as attacking know-
how.  
The only solution to countering all the above Cyber 
Threats and Cyber Attacks is the creation of a 
nation-wide system that can orchestrate a 
coordinated response, within a unified legal and 
technical framework. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
19 
 
2. The State responsible for Cyber Security 
Securing the national Cyber Space will require a collective and multidimensional (human 
and technical) effort, which means engaging all the actors of the Lebanese society. In 
Cyber Security, the most important involved actors are: 
 Government; 
 Businesses and Organizations; 
 Individuals, as citizens, employees, and consumers. 
In a fast-moving digital world, Lebanon must exert all its efforts in an attempt to 
reach a better position in terms of Cyber Security, which is a key condition to the 
safeguard and preservation of our digital sovereignty. The digital world is in constant 
change, evolution, growth, and mutation. It is therefore of paramount importance for 
Lebanon to position itself at the highest best-practice level. Lebanon must also be aware, 
and ready, to keep up – and hopefully at one point in the future – to stay ahead of the 
fast-evolving Cyber Threats. Lebanon cannot be vulnerable to Cyber Attacks. Cyber 
Security is thus a key perimeter in preserving the country’s sovereignty. 
2.1 Government 
The Government's main duty is to defend the country from attacks by other States and 
non-state actors, to protect citizens and the economy from harm, and to define the 
national and international framework necessary to protect the national interests, 
fundamental rights, and bring criminals to court. 
As an important data holder and service provider, the State is taking strict measures to 
protect its information assets. It also has a major responsibility to advise and inform 
citizens and organizations about what they need to do in order to protect themselves 
online and, where appropriate, set the standards expected from key businesses and 
organizations. The key sectors of the Lebanese economy fall within the realm of the 
private sector, the strongest among them being the banking sector. However, when it 
comes to Cyber Security and countering Cyber Crimes, the ultimate responsibility to 
ensure resilience and the maintenance of essential services and functions falls to the state, 
in a well-managed and well-balanced collaboration with LEA, the Ministry of 
Telecommunications, the regulatory bodies of the banking sector, and all other 
governmental institutions, each within its jurisdiction, as well as other national and 
international partners. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
20 
 
2.2 Businesses and organizations 
Public and private sector organizations and other institutions own personal data, provide 
services, and operate systems in the digital domain. The connectivity of information 
systems containing data and services has revolutionized their operations. However, with 
this technological transformation, one of their key responsibilities is to protect the assets 
they hold, to maintain the services they provide, and to incorporate the appropriate level 
of security into the products they sell. 
Citizens, consumers, and society in general rely on businesses and organizations to 
take all reasonable measures to protect their personal data and strengthen the resilience 
of their systems and services. Businesses and organizations must understand that they 
operate in an environment that will hold them responsible for the consequences and 
indirect impacts of Cyber Attacks, to which they fall victim. 
2.3 Individuals as citizens, employees and consumers 
Today, the national and international contexts require that valuable assets are secure, not 
only in the physical world but also in the digital, virtual world. Since, in the virtual world, 
everything is connected and interdependent, it is crucial that everyone assumes his/her 
responsibility to take all reasonable steps to protect the hardware – smart phones, tablets, 
laptops – as well as the data, software, and systems that stand behind the freedom, 
flexibility, and convenience everyone enjoys in their private and business lives. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
21 
 
3. Pillars of the National Cyber Security 
Strategy 
Considering the realities raised above, the current situation of Lebanon, and the 
upcoming challenges, the Government should engage all its institutions in the 
implementation of a comprehensive strategy capable of accomplishing the mission of 
providing a more secure Cyber Space and an increasing level of awareness among the 
main actors of the Lebanese society. 
The Lebanese Government is aware of the extreme dependence of the new economy 
on the Internet, both from public and private perspectives. In this sense, security 
exposure creates consistent levels of risk and will always motivate and provoke Cyber 
Attack attempts. 
The path Lebanon must take in order to accomplish each of the steps identified and 
analyzed above is quite challenging. It will require much effort, starting with mustering 
the political will to creating the legislation, technological, and Cyber Security assets, with 
the help of and reliance on dedicated and highly specialized human resources. 
Once the shift to this totally new approach is put in motion, the strategy will require 
at least two to four full years to be implemented. It is very important to state that, 
without claiming to be able to completely eliminate the threats that the National 
Cyber Security Strategy aims to counteract, it is of utmost importance to take all 
possible measures to reduce risks and to reach an acceptable level of security. 
Lebanon must allow companies and citizens to continue to prosper and to take advantage 
of the enormous opportunities that digital technology offers. 
A Cyber Security Strategy developed by a Government, thus representing a whole 
country, with nationwide impacts and enhancements, must foresee clear objectives and 
continuous, long-term actions. 
As Lebanon readies itself to create and launch a National Cyber Security Strategy, it is 
crucial to identify and itemize the key pillars, upon which a prospective Strategy must rely 
on. It is only by clearly identifying and prioritizing these foundational pillars that the 
development of a Strategy and its operational implementation can consequently be 
envisioned and achieved. 
Given the above, the National Cyber Strategy shall be based on the following 
strategic, key, founding axes, which shall be referred to as Pillars: 
1. Defend, deter, and reinforce against threats from inside and outside; 
2. Develop international cooperation in the field of Cyber Security; 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
22 
 
3. Continuously grow State capacities to support the development of 
information and communication technologies; 
4. Promote educational capacity on the Lebanese territory; 
5. Promote industrial and technical capacity; 
6. Support the export and internationalization of Cyber Security companies; 
7. Strengthen collaboration between the public and the private sectors; 
8. Promote the role of security and intelligence services and strengthen the 
mutual cooperation and coordination with the support and supervision of 
the higher authorities. 
It is only once the above Pillars are recognized and addressed that we can begin to 
develop a Cyber Security Strategy with clear objectives. 
3.1 Defend, deter, and reinforce against threats 
The Lebanese State shall put in place a deterrence strategy in order to significantly reduce 
the number of Cyber Crimes. A deterrence strategy in Cyber Space refers to a set of 
actions designed to stop and identify attackers as they make their first malicious 
operations on the network, taking as a premise that after gaining access to a network, 
attackers always follow a predictable Cyber Kill Chain. 
The Cyber Kill Chain is distributed across eight phases: reconnaissance, intrusion, 
exploitation, privilege escalation, lateral movement, obfuscation, denial of service, and 
exfiltration. 
During the reconnaissance phase, the hacker will discover passively the Network in 
order to gather all the necessary information. It is absolutely vital to put in action proper 
deterrence technologies and tools in order to redirect the actions of the attackers in a 
controlled path, which will be easily handled by defenders. 
The intrusion phase is then launched based on the information discovered in the 
reconnaissance phase. The objective is to enter the system and gain access to the data it 
contains. 
The exploitation phase employs an active attack, where the hacker uses different types 
of vulnerabilities identified on the target victims in order to quickly exploit them, gaining 
remote or local access – as regular users or administrators. 
Attackers then use privilege escalation technique to get increased access to resources. 
The lateral movement phase aims to allow unauthorized access to internal servers and 
the data they store and manage. Sometimes such access can also enable attackers in 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
23 
 
extending offensive actions towards external third parties, i.e. digital assets that are 
physically or logically located out of the victim’s network perimeter. 
Following this stage, obfuscation is being used to mask the activity and evade any 
forensic analysis. 
The Denial of Service Phase then stops the attack from being tracked or blocked by 
disrupting the normal activity of the users and servers. 
The last phase, exfiltration, represents the real and most important goal of the 
attackers, especially when dealing with the most experienced and skilled among them. It 
aims to remotely transfer different information and data through different exfiltration 
techniques, which could range from simple to very complex, and often using dedicated 
network infrastructures. 
Once Lebanon has complied with basic Cyber Security standards and has applied this 
Strategy, the Government and the National Cyber Security Information System 
Agency (NCISA) shall be able to assess vulnerabilities; to alert with recommendations 
on preventative measures against the main consequences; to identify threats; to respond 
promptly and efficiently to attacks; and to maintain the Lebanese cyber environment 
secure. Several tools and technologies can be used in order to create a functional cyber 
deterrence framework. Before implementing them, however, it is mandatory to develop 
defense-specific technical and judicial capabilities. 
A commonly agreed upon definition of deterrence in Cyber Space involves two 
elements: defense capabilities (deterrence by denial) and offensive capabilities (deterrence 
by punishment). Defensive capabilities are here understood to be Cyber Defense, i.e. the 
protection of a State's essential Information Systems (IS) and their ability to withstand 
constant and varied attacks. On the other hand, under an ongoing attack, deterrence is 
achieved by initiating the appropriate actions leading to stop the attack and to pursue the 
offenders.  
Another component of deterrence is Cyber Dissuasion which involves the threat of 
retaliating with intolerable consequences in Cyber Space, designed to convince an 
opponent not to attack in the first place. It is about putting enough force on display for 
the purpose of eliminating the need of using it.  
Developing defensive capabilities must follow the below course of actions: 
 Create an active Lebanese Cyber Defense Model, which must include best 
practices and incorporate low-level and high-level technical actions, such as 
blocks, filters, white and black lists, etc., against phishing attacks, malicious 
domains and related command & control takedowns, malware-based attacks, 0-
day based attacks and exploitation frameworks, email spoofing, IP reputation 
services, etc. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
24 
 
 Use proven and well-known security information feeds to compile the necessary 
information to build a reputation database of resources in Cyber Space, allowing 
for better control and filtering of malicious and dangerous content and threats. 
Using international Cyber Security standards and best practices will allow the 
Lebanese Cyber Security model not only to be complete, but also to benefit from 
the existing vast expertise of international standards bodies. 
 Classify data and define critical infrastructures, thus setting the foundations to 
build a more secure National internet environment, from the perspective of 
proactive defense. This should go along with protecting Government institutions 
and other priority sectors, taking into consideration the latest Cyber Security 
standards and Cyber Security best practices, such as, but not limited to: upgrading 
to the latest software versions; applying patching to customers; and scanning for 
known vulnerabilities.  
 Change public and business behavior, ensuring that individual organizations, 
regardless of their size, are taking the proper steps to protect themselves. 
 Manage incidents and the understanding of threats from an operational, national 
security, geopolitical, and technical perspectives that will allow better control of 
security risks by combining reactivity and proactivity, in order to reduce the cyber 
risk exposure window. In parallel, design, build, and run innovative multi-layered 
security solutions, permitting to anticipate advanced attacks. 
 Make Lebanese computer systems a harder target for Cyber Criminals, reducing 
benefits to hackers (deterrence by prohibition) and increasing costs (deterrence by 
reprisal). It is therefore necessary to be able to identify the interests and objectives 
of the potential aggressor but also to have sufficiently credible and persuasive 
capacities. 
 Ensure that the State’s national capabilities and intention to react are clearly 
understood in order to influence (discourage) the decision-making of potential 
attackers.  
 Eliminate easy-to-use opportunities for attackers, who want to compromise 
Lebanese networks and IT systems. The Government shall have the necessary 
tools and capabilities to carry out the following: deny the attackers’ easy 
opportunities to compromise the Lebanese networks and systems; understand the 
intentions and abilities of attackers; overcome large-scale basic malware threats; 
and respond and protect the nation in Cyber Space. 
 Prevent people from being attracted to or get involved in Cyber Crime by 
reinforcing early intervention measures. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
25 
 
 Establish a systemized and inculcated action plan that can prepare advanced 
options for reacting to a Cyber Attack so that Authorities can respond to a crisis 
while it occurs. Response to Cyber Threats and Cyber Attacks must become an 
automatic action doctrine. This doctrine shall be based on Lebanon's 
interpretation of the application of existing international law in Cyber Space. In 
fact, Lebanon cannot decide to react autonomously to a Cyber Attack without 
considering and respecting existing international laws and regulations. 
 Incorporate international legal standards to the national classification system of 
Cyber Attacks. Integrating national and international principles related to Cyber 
Security is an essential element of an action doctrine, that also represent an 
important support tool for the authorities in order to take more effective decisions 
and act as a relevant means of supporting international cooperation. 
 Strengthen law enforcement capacity and expertise at the national, regional, and 
local levels to identify and deter Cyber Criminals in Lebanon and abroad. 
 Improve the capabilities of digital sovereignty and using data centers physically on 
the national territory. The prospect of digital sovereignty over data must lead to 
the establishment of legal and technical solutions. Moreover, mastering key 
technologies is essential to the exercise of our digital sovereignty. Key 
technologies include, but are not limited to the encryption of communications and 
the detection of Cyber Attacks and professional mobile radios.  
 Adopt a certification framework for high-level security products. The current 
certification framework is poorly suited to the evaluation of commonly used 
products, such as connected objects, for which costs and time are prohibitive. For 
this reason, it is recommended to introduce a basic Cyber Security certification on 
products, in addition to the existing certification framework. The latter could build 
on existing systems in contexts other than Cyber Security, such as the CE marking 
required for the marketing of certain goods and services within Europe. This basic 
Cyber Security certification shall involve compliance and analysis on Cyber 
Security best practices, based on predefined specifications. It shall be placed under 
the control of a private body, with public authorities’ participation limited to 
indirect actions, such as NCISA-approved assessment entities of Cyber Security 
accreditation. 
 Strengthen the fight against Cyber Crime through the advanced criminal tools 
detection; by increasing the skills and number of people working in the field and 
improving specification; training different stakeholders, such as judges, public 
prosecutors, as well as bank employees, etc.; legal assistance to victims of Cyber 
Crime; disincentives against abusers and offenders; regular Cyber Security training 
to law enforcement authorities; and finally, regular updating of laws and 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
26 
 
procedures in line with the development of Information and Communication 
Technologies. 
Under specific circumstances, while acting under an on-going attack, strategy might 
shift from a defense-only operational mindset to an offensive one. On such occasions, 
the following actions should be taken: 
 Prosecute Cyber Crime offenders. The Government – through the legal 
authorities, LEAs, and the NCISA – must dissuade those who would harm the 
interests of the Nation. To achieve this, efforts must continually be made to make 
it clear that any cyber attempt on the Nation, whether to rob or harm, is neither 
easy nor cheap. Attackers must know that they cannot act with impunity. The 
Government – through the legal authorities, LEAs, and the activity of the NCISA 
– should be able to identify attackers and act against them, using the most 
appropriate action among a set of available tools. Law Enforcement Agencies 
shall focus on criminals who persist in attacking Lebanese citizens and businesses. 
National authorities should cooperate with international partners to target 
criminals wherever they are and to dismantle their infrastructure and facilitation 
networks. LEAs shall also continue to contribute to awareness building and 
standardization in Cyber Security issues, in close collaboration with the NCISA. 
 Strengthen the effectiveness of the judicial action to improve the fight against 
Cyber Crime thus being able to identify, if and when needed, the actors behind a 
Cyber Attack. In order to be able to accomplish such a complex goal, it is 
mandatory to have the legal means, along with the technical capabilities, expertise, 
dedicated infrastructures, and ad-hoc tools.  
 Strengthen the effectiveness of Law Enforcement Agencies correctly to perform 
“Attribution to a Cyber Attack.” Authorizations to deploy such a set of actions 
should be prudently released to specific government institutions according to the 
nature of action.  
 Develop an international network of collaboration between judges and 
investigators, as well as introduce dedicated trainings and educational programs at 
existing national and international entities located on the Lebanese territory. 
3.2 Develop international cooperation in Cyber Security 
To reinforce the positive effects of the implementation of the National Cyber Security 
Strategy, it is mandatory that Lebanon works closely with other regional and international 
actors. In particular, the following actions are highly recommended: 
 Work with international partners, such as INTERPOL, UN organizations (ITU, 
UNODC, UNICRI, etc.), European Delegation in Lebanon and European 
institutions and agencies (Council of Europe, EUROPOL, CEPOL, ENISA, etc.), 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
27 
 
as well as other international Standard Institutes for Framework (NIST, EBIOS, 
etc.), and international and regional CERTS. 
 Use existing networks and relationships with the Government’s key international 
partners and build new links with other international entities to share information 
about current and nascent threats, adding value to existing thought and expertise. 
 Establish strategic bilateral relations and open dialogue channels with key 
stakeholders to share information about potential incidents.  
 Build international partnerships to end the perceived impunity of Cyber Criminals 
acting against Lebanon by bringing criminals in overseas jurisdictions to justice. 
 Cooperate with the international community on Cyber Space issues to harmonize 
and increase the efficiency of a shared body of laws and regulations. This shall 
allow the Government of Lebanon to optimize timing, procedures, and costs, thus 
establishing or adapting to common mechanisms for crisis management, 
communication, and de-escalation. Lebanon must continue to work for the 
universalization of certain standards applied in Cyber Space with a view to 
enhancing its security. This approach should be based on three principles: 
 Prevention: the inherent uncertainty of the attribution of an attack should 
encourage the States to concentrate their efforts on preventive measures; 
 Cooperation: improving cooperation within the international community on 
Cyber Space issues is an effective way to increase stability through better 
mutual understanding and even trust between stakeholders. This will also 
create common mechanisms of crisis management, communication, and 
de-escalation. Lebanon must work towards the conclusion of an 
international agreement on the obligations of a State, the infrastructure of 
which could be used for malicious purposes, such as “launch pads” in 
order to proxy-attack other countries (“triangulation” of a Cyber Attack), 
etc.  
 Stability: the country must continue to promote the principle of the 
existence of certain rights enabling States that are victims of computer 
attacks to take appropriate measures while maintaining international peace 
and security. 
3.3 Reinforcement of State capacities to support the development 
of ICT 
The State must initiate an awareness and training programs that familiarize its civil 
servants working in the IT and ICT sectors as well as its citizens and professionals with 
good practices in digital uses. It is by being aware of cyber risks and by being trained to 
adopt the appropriate behavior that users will be able to face Cyber Threats. Whether in 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
28 
 
the context of private use (young people exposed, in particular, to inappropriate content 
or harassment and malice on the web) or professional practices (administrations and 
companies), educated and sensitized citizens represent the first barrier in the protection 
of information. Cyber Security trainings need to be considered as part of the National 
Strategy to ensure that today’s and tomorrow's decision-makers are aware of the risks and 
the know how to deal with threats. In this context, it seems essential for the State to 
promote research and its industrial capabilities, to improve the defense capabilities of the 
public sector, and to engage the public sector in a dialogue with the banking sector and 
the private sector involved in the digital economy. 
3.4 Promote educational capacity on the Lebanese territory 
To address the shortage in skilled Cyber Security specialists, the Government and the 
Lebanese University, along with private universities, schools, and organizations, must 
invest in Cyber Security awareness programs via a Cyber Academy platform. These same 
actors must set up university curricula to train qualified and talented high-level specialists 
to bridge the gap between supply and demand in the Cyber Security field. 
Digital security awareness should be an essential part of non-specialized higher 
education to introducing future graduates to Cyber Security. Each institution shall 
therefore ensure that organizations providing initial or continuing training courses 
integrate Cyber Security awareness teaching into their various courses and that the 
material is adapted to each training offered. 
It would be desirable to integrate Cyber Security in IT subjects in the National 
Education System (pre-university curriculum), including a Cyber Security component in 
school curricula as well as innovative and motivating activities in the classroom, 
challenges, and summer programs. 
Under the aegis of a future national information systems security agency which will be 
set up (see Part II), the NCISA, the State shall have to assess the needs for initial and 
continuous training programs in the short, medium, and long term. This shall require a 
proactive collaboration with the Ministry of Education and all relevant actors in the 
administration and the private sector, including trade unions. 
Key technologies for which in-depth knowledge is required in Cyber Security trades 
and in general for the development of a trusted digital environment, should also be 
identified.  
As part of continuing education, the human resources of institutions and companies, 
specifically those in professional categories with social and state responsibilities, should 
be able to benefit from digital training that includes Cyber Security awareness. 
ENA Civil Servant College, in partnership with professional syndicates, shall be called 
upon to develop and implement continuing education programs tailored to the needs of 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
29 
 
public administration employees and managers to match the pace of growth and 
development in the private sector. 
The State is aware of the need to promote scientific and technological research in the 
digital fields, so that Lebanese universities and research institutes attract the best minds in 
the field of Cyber Security. The Government therefore proposes to encourage an active 
partnership between training institutes and industry, which shall lead to a real 
collaborative, mutually beneficial dialogue between the State and the actors in Cyber 
Security. To achieve this goal, the following actions should be considered: 
 Identify areas of science and technology that Government, industry, and academia 
consider important and identify potential gaps in Lebanon. 
 Fund and Government-support academic centers of excellence, research 
institutes, and doctoral training centers to address important areas, such as large 
data analysis, trusted industrial control systems, science-based research, and more.  
 Establish centers of excellence (or encourage existing centers) that attract the 
most competent and dynamic scientists and researchers, and deepen the active 
partnership between universities, government, and industry. In particular, the 
Government should support the development of leading cyber products and 
dynamic new businesses in Cyber Security. 
 Fund research and develop high-level security equipments to improve the level of 
product security for businesses and the general public. 
 Provide funding and governmental support to academic centers of excellence and 
research institutes that address important research in digital technologies, and 
sponsor PhD students and holders of PhD degrees to increase the number of 
Lebanese experts with cyber expertise. 
 Strengthen the partnership between research and industry, through scholarships, 
bilateral funding, and State-funded research. This form of collaboration shall 
always respect the principles of equity and meritocracy, thus enhancing the 
technical skills in Cyber Security of the people involved. 
 Create an expert panel for digital trust entrusted with the mission to: 
 Identify the key technologies for which in-depth knowledge is required for 
Cyber Security professions; 
 Evaluate initial and continuing education needs; 
 Monitor research and support its development; 
 Support young PhD holders; 
 Encourage financing and support research and industrial development in 
the field of digital technologies. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
30 
 
As main actors of public life, civil servants should be aware at their different post 
levels, of responsibilities for the protection of the data to which they have access. To 
improve the protection of all the components of the country and to prevent any threat, 
the State must: 
 Strengthen the security of its information systems by developing and monitoring 
security policies for interdepartmental electronic communications network and by 
ensuring secure deployment of mobile devices. 
 Evaluate on a yearly basis the application of the State Information Systems 
Security Policy and the effectiveness of the measures adopted. Parliament shall be 
informed by means of indicators, which shall also include the responsiveness to its 
official recommendations to address Cyber Security. More generally, senior quality 
regulation officials will ensure that issues related to strengthening the security of 
information systems are taken into account in the standard-setting process, which 
is carried out on a regular basis. 
 Attract competent, effectively-trained cyber specialists to the Government to 
maintain our National Security, including an understanding of the impact of Cyber 
Space on security operations. 
 Include Cyber Security elements in all public service training programs and in the 
recruitment exam for the Corps of Information and Communication Systems 
Engineers. Public servants process sensitive data, which they must know how to 
protect at the level of each ministry. 
 Ensure that the experience of public servants in the field of Cyber Security is 
optimized throughout their career. 
 Give Law Enforcement Agencies, public authorities, and the banking sector a high 
level of independence on matters related to Cyber Security, infrastructures, 
process approaches, and operational decisions, as they relate to their own, internal 
mandates. This general approach must always be aligned with the Cyber Security 
Strategy of the Government, which shall be ensured through a National Agency at 
the highest national defense level. 
 The Prime Minister shall receive a semestrial confidential report with the result of 
the audits on Cyber Threats, Cyber Attacks, Cyber Vulnerabilities, and the 
coordinated response of all the concerned authorities. 
 Preserve Lebanon's autonomy in decision-making, including the mobilization of 
human and budgetary resources. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
31 
 
3.5 Promote industrial and technical capacity 
Lebanon must develop an ecosystem conducive to the development of the digital 
economy and the international promotion of its digital products and services. It must 
ensure that administrations, companies, and citizens have access to digital products and 
services at levels of trust and security adapted to uses and Cyber Threats. For this 
purpose, the country must: 
 Develop and enhance the national offering of security products and services. In 
collaboration with the various ministries (Telecom, Industry, Economy, Interior, 
Defense, Foreign Affairs, OMSAR, etc....) and a National Agency for Cyber 
Security (NCISA), the State must promote an industrial policy to strengthen 
national companies developing computer security products and services. The State 
must also encourage dynamic new businesses in Cyber Security and the 
development and the production of advanced cyber-products. 
 Collaborate with stakeholders – with Cyber Security companies in particular – and 
academic environments to provide training and advice to the public and private 
sectors. As the burgeoning and innovative Cyber Security sector is a necessity for 
the national modern, digital economy, the State shall seek to develop 
opportunities for collaboration with the private sector in training and education 
and to promote facilities for maintaining and exercising skills. For their part, 
Cyber Security companies shall provide governments and businesses with cutting-
edge technologies, training, and advice. 
 Produce or procure reliable equipment to detect and protect from Cyber Attacks, 
primarily for life-critical operators (OIV- Opérateur d’Importance Vitale), as well as 
secure mobile products for all businesses. Most of the equipment and digital 
products available on the market today do not have the level of computer security 
to keep them safe. For companies, the level of product security must therefore 
become a differentiator, a competitive advantage. An adequate security evaluation 
and certification process must be put in place to clear mission-critical equipment. 
 Identify and list, through NCISA, all the country’s critical infrastructures (OIVs) 
to implement ad-hoc security policies and best practices. 
 Qualify and monitor Cyber Security products, hardware, and services to identify 
those which can endanger IT activities by enabling Cyber Espionage and 
government-sponsored attacks. 
3.6 Support the export and internationalization of Cyber Security 
companies 
It is essential for Lebanon to support the creation and development of an industrial 
sector of Cyber Security, for which it must: 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
32 
 
 Support collaborative initiatives generated by the private sector. The State shall 
support the economic development of the industrial Cyber Security sector to 
encourage the local development of Cyber Security products and services that will 
ensure Lebanon’s non-dependency on foreign and foreign-controlled security 
products.  
 The State shall seek to enhance the visibility and competitiveness of the Lebanese 
products abroad and facilitate access for SMEs and start-ups to international 
markets. Interdepartmental coordination will be structured and strengthened. An 
organization in support of companies will be implemented beyond the one-off 
and often isolated actions currently carried out by the various ministries and state 
entities. Export control procedures for Cyber Security solutions will be clarified 
and optimized.  
 Create specific support systems for Cyber Security actors, with clear conditions 
for access and implementation methods. In parallel, clarify and optimize the 
conditions of access to implementation methods of existing support systems. 
 Establish clear procedures to control the export of Cyber Security solutions. 
 Integrate security criteria into the selection of digital products and services in 
public procurement. 
3.7 Strengthen collaboration between the public and private sectors 
As a major player in the economy and the main service provider, the Government is the 
first potential user of high-level Cyber Security products. Greater permeability between 
the public and private sectors would allow Lebanon to enhance its efforts in the area of 
every-day digital security, by enabling each beneficiary better to detect and deal with 
Cyber Threats. For that, it would be necessary to: 
 Encourage the creation, development and innovation of the Cyber Security sector, 
in collaboration with the Government, academia and the private sector. 
 Strengthen collaboration between Government and industry to provide each with 
proactive information on threats. In order to obtain information, each has to 
contribute to upstream disruption efforts. 
 Encourage Government-industry partnerships to help define and target 
interventions for growth and innovation. 
 Support the establishment of accelerators and start-ups dedicated to Cyber 
Security. 
 Collaborate with the financial sector to make Lebanon a more hostile 
environment for those seeking to monetize stolen credentials, including disrupting 
their networks. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
33 
 
 Transfer, through NCISA, the gained knowledge to the private sector in order to 
enhance its Cyber Security, while identifying competent and trustworthy service 
providers, which should enable the detection and treatment of the inevitable 
growth in the number of Cyber Attacks against businesses.  The requirements for 
Cyber Security must be integrated in public contracting and draft legislation, while 
stimulating growth in the Cyber Security sector through: 
 Integrating security criteria in the selection of digital products and services 
in public contracting;  
 Offering a bonus factor if the bid is accompanied by a Cyber Security risk 
analysis; 
 Ensuring that laws include a section in their impact assessment dedicated 
to digital technology, including Cyber Security. 
3.8 The role of Law Enforcement Agencies 
To improve Cyber Security capabilities, Law Enforcement Agencies (Army, Internal 
Security Forces, General Security, State Security) must take the following actions: 
 Increase the capacity of LEA, in coordination with international partner agencies, 
to identify, anticipate, and disrupt hostile cyber activities of foreign actors, Cyber 
Criminals, and terrorists. This will improve their intelligence gathering and 
exploitation, in order to obtain preventative information about the intentions and 
abilities of attackers. 
 Strengthen law enforcement efforts to prosecute and target criminals, wherever 
they may be, in coordination with local and international partners. Law 
Enforcement Agencies shall target criminals, who persist in attacking Lebanese 
citizens and businesses, by dismantling their infrastructure and facilitation 
networks.  
 Law Enforcement Agencies and the banking sector shall also continue to 
contribute to the awareness and standardization of Cyber Security. 
 Improve the actions of LEA and judicial services in investigations under judicial 
authority. The most important enabler factor and approach for all issues related to 
Cyber Crimes is dedicated, high-level, professional technical training, which must 
include laboratory-based, hands-on modules, sessions, and exercises. Additional 
boosters of quality can speed and enhance this process – these include dedicated 
procedural, technical, and operational relationships with international Cyber 
Security bodies, organizations, and specialized teams, supported by regular 
information sharing. 
 Strengthen coordination across Law Enforcement Agencies, including exchanging 
information on threat analysis. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
34 
 
 Treat anticipation and prevention as a priority for competent authorities dealing in 
information system security. This can be achieved by building a Cyber Threats 
Intelligence platform. This CTI platform should receive continuous input data 
both from domestic (National Agencies) and foreign sources. Data may even be 
obtained through the acquisition of commercial data sets (“feeds”) from the few 
specialized, private companies, which provide 100% neutral information, i.e. not 
officially or unofficially backed by any foreign Government. The CTI platform 
shall act as the core of the Government’s National CERT (CERT-LB), which 
must be established within the NCISA. The CERT-LB shall then provide data 
feeds, alerts, early warnings, etc. to domestic SOCs (Security Operation Centers). 
 Enhance the Cyber Warfare capabilities of Intelligence Agencies and the Army, 
by, for instance, securing training sessions and support, exposing them to the 
activities and best practices of similar Cyber Security Agencies in most advanced 
countries. 
 Facilitate coordination among National Agencies, by, for example, hosting 
periodic meetings to discuss Cyber Security matters, providing facilities to the 
agencies in order to meet and respond to national cyber incidents, and hosting 
domestic Cyber Security incident response drills. 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
35 
 
4. Objectives 
At the national level, Cyber Security strategy must be designed to implement, for the 
public and private sectors and for citizens, a strategic defense plan against Cyber Threats, 
ensuring its sustainability by institutionalizing it through a clear structure and objectives. 
A Cyber Security Strategy shall also incorporate decisive actions to protect the Lebanese 
economy and the privacy of Lebanese citizens. Overall, the main goal of this National 
Strategy is to outline a set of decisions, which must lead to operational actions that make 
Lebanon confident, capable, and resilient in a fast-moving digital world. 
The following main objectives must be accomplished: 
 Encourage the Government, organizations, businesses, and individuals to play 
their part in this collective effort to secure the national Cyber Space; 
 Improve the availability and usability of services, enhance transparency, encourage 
citizen participation in governance, and cut public and private sector Cyber 
Threats and the costs of Cyber Attacks; 
 Apply an appropriate and effective incident management notification and 
response mechanism;  
 Manage security incidents and reduce risk, thus being able accurately to estimate 
current and upcoming Cyber Threats; 
 Respond quickly and effectively to Cyber Threats, using the most appropriate 
capability, to major incidents in Cyber Space as they occur to maintain the security 
and resilience of networks, data, and systems.  
 Develop the legal, procedural, and technical means to defend Lebanon against 
constantly evolving Cyber Threats, to provide an effective response to incidents, 
and to ensure the protection and resilience of the country's networks, data, and 
systems; 
 Improve response capabilities to Cyber Attacks by adopting appropriate measures 
and increasing the country’s resistance to the most common Cyber Threats. The 
Government needs to build on its capabilities and those of the industry, actively 
supporting the development and implementation of active Cyber Defense 
measures to significantly improve ICT security levels on domestic networks; 
 Provide support and assistance to organizations in response to security incidents. 
In particular, the State must ensure that the Government, whether from a 
preventive perspective or in response to an incident, collaborates actively with the 
private sector. National incident management processes must take a 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
36 
 
comprehensive incident approach, through which it is possible to learn from 
partners and share mitigation techniques; 
 Ensure that incidents are mandatorily and promptly reported to the Nation’s 
Cyber Security Authority, namely the NCISA, thus allowing an understanding 
of the magnitude, scope, and severity of the threat; 
 Identify the root causes of attacks at the national level, reducing the incidence of 
multiple and repeated exploitation on several victims and sectors;  
 Use relationships with other IT security incident response teams, both at the 
domestic and international level, as part of an incident management protocol; 
 Measure Cyber Crime using reliable statistics and analysis of digital crimes to guide 
responsive action. In the absence of such statistics, public authorities cannot 
continuously reassess policies and implement adequate measures. In this case, the 
Ministry of the Interior must implement new instruments to monitor the 
evolution of Cyber Crime to guide public action; 
 Establish a database of cyber incidents to enable both a broad view and detailed 
analysis of Cyber Threat trends to identify security solutions and/or product and 
service needs. This would also benefit the cyber-insurance industry, which relies 
on statistical and historical data about cyber incidents in its assessment of risk;  
 Promote a Secure Internet environment for Vital Operators. Each OIV should 
develop and implement its security measures and security policies in line with this 
Strategy, in order to operate their security operation center for monitoring and 
reacting efficiently to security incidents, with the support of behavioral analytics 
techniques, intelligent correlation, and filtering of security alerts; 
 Encourage hardware and software vendors to develop and sell products, for 
which security controls are enabled by default; 
 Once the Lebanese cyber environment and Cyber Hygiene comply with basic 
standards of security at the level of the single technological product/item and the 
single user (Stakeholders), the NCISA shall produce new standards with the main 
objective to obtain a full Security by Design for every ICT device connected to 
Lebanon’s assigned public IP address space; 
 Ensure that service providers comply with laws and regulations. The challenge 
here is to make a drastic change in the security controls built into the software and 
hardware already enabled by the manufacturer before the product is launched on 
the market. The user must be able to benefit from maximum security on a 
commercially viable product or service, while remaining in the context of a freely 
accessible and open Internet; 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
37 
 
 Emphasize human values in Cyber Space, promoting respect for human rights to 
ensure that individuals are empowered, that they have complete digital self-
determination, and privacy;  
 Change behavior by ensuring that Governmental entities, organizations, 
businesses, and individuals have the knowledge and skills to defend themselves 
and take appropriate measures to protect themselves and their clients from the 
harm caused by Cyber Attacks; 
 Sensitize the Lebanese people to good practices and launch an ambitious program 
to raise awareness among all Lebanese, following the below line of actions:  
 Integrate Cyber Security awareness into all higher education and continuing 
education programs; integrate Cyber Security into the pre-university 
education system (in the form of classroom activities, challenges, and 
summer courses) and into programs in specific fields, such as computer 
science; implement Cyber Security awareness programs in partnership with 
universities, schools, and private organizations; 
 Launch a call for expression of interest to produce awareness-raising 
content addressed to the general public;  
 Launch national initiatives in partnership with LEA to raise awareness of 
the risks of the Internet and educate school students;  
 Create a digital education portal in collaboration with the academic 
community; 
 Develop projects for communication campaigns as part of a "great national 
cause" (to build confidence in digital products);  
 Promote Cyber Security best practices and launch awareness campaigns to 
engage the society, and highlight the risks of enemy manipulations of 
information in the Cyberspace; 
 Ensure a radical change in public behavior, maintaining a consistent set of 
messages on Cyber Security guidance from both the Government and its partners; 
 Improve the culture of Cyber Security in Lebanese society by understanding cyber 
risks and the stages of Cyber Hygiene; 
 Inform about the risks of manipulation and propaganda techniques used by 
malicious actors on the Internet. The relevant defense and security services are 
responsible for detecting propaganda or Cyber Terrorism incidences and 
providing the government with recommendations for the implementation of 
counter measures. It is crucial to put in place an information platform to respond 
to acts of propaganda or destabilization; 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
38 
 
 Strengthen the security of the most sensitive information systems of critical 
infrastructures, in both public and private operators, through adequate and 
regularly updated legislative measures. This process will gradually be extended to 
public and private operators involved in handling or managing sensitive 
information systems; 
 Ensure that the LEA have the strongest defenses to keep their networks and 
platforms secure and resilient. These stakeholders must be able to continue to 
operate and maintain their freedom of action despite Cyber Threats, and to 
provide assistance in the event of a large-scale Cyber Attack at the national level.  
 Prepare the legal and operational phases for the institutionalization by creating a 
central authority at the highest level of defense: the NCISA. 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
39 
 
PART II. INSTITUTIONALIZATION –  
THE NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEM AGENCY (NCSIA) 
 
The security of information systems is of crucial importance to a wide variety of 
organizations and actors, both public and private, domestically and internationally. 
Whether in the political, diplomatic, economic, or military field, Cyber Security is 
today a collective concern and a national priority. Indeed, Cyber Threats and Cyber 
Attacks are on the rise and they can inflict serious damage to the interests of the Nation. 
Faced with this risk, Lebanon, like many other countries around the world, must have a 
strong and reliable national computer defense system. 
To achieve this goal, the National Cyber Security Committee has concluded that the 
creation of a national agency for the security of information systems is a necessary and 
essential step to facilitate a coordinated and proactive approach to managing Cyber 
Security problems and to track the growth and diversity of Cyber Threats and to robustly 
address their increasing sophistication. 
The creation of a Lebanese agency reporting directly to the Prime Minister and 
attached to the General Secretariat of the Higher Council of Defense is a crucial step in 
the response of the Lebanese State to major current and future challenges in the field of 
Cyber Security.  
The NCISA shall perform its mandate in close coordination with the concerned 
ministries and LEA, without conflicting with their respective legal and mandated roles.  
The NCISA will enable Lebanon to centralize and coordinate decisions at the level of 
the various state services in the field of Cyber Security, and thereby increase the country’s 
resilience to digital threats. 
Part II of the Strategy gives a detailed description of the NCISA's role and functions 
and the different sectors in which it will operate. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
40 
 
5. The Institutionalization of a National 
Agency for Cyber Security 
The National Cyber Security and Information System Agency (NCISA) is a governmental 
authority, operating under the General Secretariat of the Higher Council of Defense, 
responsible for Lebanon’s information system Cyber Security policies, procedures, and 
their implementations in line with the Lebanese National Cyber Security Strategy. The 
NCISA performs its public duties within the framework of the legislation, rules, and 
regulations pertaining to Cyber Security. 
The area of activities of this NCISA are, inter alia, to set policies and procedures, to 
develop plans, to assess vulnerabilities, to identify threats, to enhance awareness, to alert -
with recommendations- to respond promptly and efficiently to Cyber Attacks in order to 
maintain the Lebanese cyber environment secure and resilient.  
The NCISA also defines critical information infrastructure and critical operators, 
helps to classify data, and establishes a certification framework for high-level digital 
security products. Moreover, the NCISA aims to raise the level of knowledge in Cyber 
Security by initiating and spreading awareness through training programs as well as the 
diffusion of know-how exchanged through international cooperation. 
The NCISA’s essential role is as a coordinator and facilitator: it coordinates with all 
government agencies, concerned ministries, and other public institutions and fosters 
cooperation among the public and private sectors, industry, and academia. 
The NCISA, within its mandate, assists and supports all stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors concerned by Cyber Security. The NCISA also provides technical 
advice and establishes guidelines reflecting public and corporate priorities and best 
practices in terms of Cyber Security. 
NCISA shall work closely with concerned ministries and institutions, LEA, and with 
the industrial sector to assess and share information on the latest criminal threats, help 
industries defend against threats, mitigate the consequences of Cyber Attacks on 
Lebanese victims (administration, corporate, industry, individuals…), and create a 
national template for handling emergency situations in Cyber Space or Cyber Security. 
5.1 The NCISA’s mandate at the national level 
The National Cyber Security Information Agency (NCISA) draws its legitimacy from a 
country-wide mandate that defines its role and determines its functions, in accordance 
with the national needs in Cyber Security as defined by the Government’s Strategy. 
NCISA shall thus be assigned the following tasks: 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
41 
 
1. Facilitate and supervise the design, implementation, and coordination of secure 
inter-ministerial/inter-departmental means of electronic communications at the 
governmental level. 
2. Elaborate the implementation of the country’s Cyber Security Policy for 
Information Systems and secure the effectiveness of the measures adopted based 
on a yearly, confidential audit and evaluation report that shall be submitted to the 
Prime Minister. 
3. Support in establishing, at the national level, the Cyber Security Incidents 
Response Team (CSIRT) that works daily with the ministries and law enforcement 
agencies. The CSIRT is the central repository of cyber incidents across the 
territory, where all stakeholders exchange their notification of Cyber Attacks. The 
CISRT supports all participants in the remediation, defense and prevention against 
the notified attacks. Also, it defines the Cyber Threat scale and issues a yearly 
National Threat Watch Report. It cooperates closely with the international CSIRT 
community (FIRST). 
4. Build an event or incident detection system for threats that can affect the national 
information systems security and coordinate the intervention in response to these 
events. 
5. Organize, as needed, Cyber Security training courses and awareness-raising 
campaigns for governmental institutions, government personnel, and interested 
private entities in the field of information systems Cyber Security and Cyber 
Defense. 
6. Assist and advise public administrative entities and institutions as well as the 
private sector on the implementation of secured information systems that are 
resistant to Cyber Attacks and diffuse threat assessment and recommendations to 
the public and private sectors and to the citizens. 
7. Apply appropriate Cyber Security standards and enforce their adoption in all 
government agencies. 
8. Provide dynamic intelligence on criminal Cyber Threats in a common database, 
which the industry can interface with to better defend itself.  
9. Identify standards and practices and safety tips related to observed Cyber Security 
incidents. 
10. Cooperate with relevant operators, mainly operators of vital importance (OIV) 
and critical infrastructure, to identify and characterize Cyber Attacks affecting 
their operation. 
11. Protect the Government’s classified and highly sensitive information and assets 
from Cyber Attacks. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
42 
 
12. Perform Cyber Security crisis management drills. Such drills that will be 
conducted at the national level shall progressively cover the entire territory and the 
sectors of activity of vital importance.  
13. Law Enforcement Agencies and concerned administrative entities/ministries and 
institutions, in conjunction with NCISA, shall continue to set up operational 
Cyber Defense capabilities to deal with major Cyber Security-related crises. 
5.2 The NCISA and the public – from individuals to companies 
The NCISA provides quality support and recommendations to businesses and citizens on 
Cyber Threats. By doing so, it sets up, for example, an easily accessible database of 
information and prevention systems and conducts publicity campaigns aimed at 
informing and raising awareness about Cyber Threats among the general public. 
As part of its role with the general public, the NCISA shall: 
 Implement measures to defend Lebanese citizens and computer information 
systems against known and emerging threats by establishing a platform that allows 
corporate entities/citizens to notify NCISA of the Cyber Threats they face. 
 For prevention purposes, recommend technical solutions and training programs 
aimed at protecting/securing the digital domain. These solutions shall include 
national and international drills, accessible to all companies and the general public 
to improve preparedness in Cyber Space. 
 Participate in the orientation of academic research, studies, and the development 
of software, hardware, devices, and technologies centered on information systems 
security. 
5.3 The NCISA’s involvement in the qualification and monitoring of 
products 
In ensuring the quality of digital products and services, the NCISA shall carry out the 
following tasks: 
 Help ensure an active surveillance of digital security technologies used by 
government institutions, businesses, and citizens. 
 Assist in qualifying and monitoring Cyber Security products and services and 
support the development of new digital security assets that reflect the latest trends 
and changes in usage patterns. 
 Contribute to the promotion of national technologies and know-how in 
information systems security by developing a framework for product qualification 
and certification in line with the Government’s objectives and sovereignty. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
43 
 
5.4 The NCISA facing Cyber Threats 
The NCISA analyses and manages the risks of Cyber Attacks when new technologies are 
deployed in the digital transformation process. It shall be responsible for the following: 
 Setting up a National Cyber Security Incident Management, which maps out the 
most critical systems, and conducts Cyber Threat analysis, detection, and 
understanding. 
 Monitoring technological evolution to anticipate changes and propose the 
necessary innovations in information systems security. 
 Conducting audits of service information systems and collecting technical 
information for the sole purpose of managing Cyber Security incidents affecting 
these systems. 
 Strengthening and supporting LEA in the fight against Cyber Terrorism and 
organized Cyber Crime by improving the means in the following initiatives: 
 Countering hostile foreign actors; 
 Preventing Cyber Terrorism; 
 Countering, on the domestic territory, radical thinking and behavior related 
to Cyber Space; 
5.5 The NCISA and the protection of Operators of Vital Importance (OVI) 
An Operator of Vital Importance (OVI) or a critical infrastructure is any public or private 
entity that manages and operates sensitive data and important sectoral services, such as, 
but not limited to, the telecommunication infrastructure, energy sector, health 
infrastructure, national personal data platforms, etc.... 
The NCISA’s role in protecting OVIs shall follow the actions below: 
 Strengthen the protection of vital operators, particularly in the areas of electronic 
communications, electricity supply, and digital service companies by adopting 
strong requirements for Cyber Security safety regulations. 
 Involve electronic communications operators and web hosting companies in the 
implementation of detection systems in their networks to detect Cyber Attacks 
targeting their subscribers (probes, sensors, behavioral detection, etc.). 
 Provide risk analysis tools and independent systems to assess the level of security 
and Cyber Security reliability of digital products and services in critical industries.  
When digital products and services store personal data, or are intended for industries 
of vital importance, NCISA shall provide assistance for conducting risk analysis and for 
elaborating best practices in terms of cyber protection. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
44 
 
The NCISA shall also contribute to the establishment of mechanisms to 
independently assess the level of security and reliability of these products and services, 
and to provide their potential users with appropriate safeguards through labeling. For this 
purpose, the NCISA shall accomplish the following: 
 Define best practices and mechanisms to strengthen key/critical national 
infrastructure (sensitive sites or OVIs) and protect them from Cyber Attacks. The 
NCISA, in collaboration with regional administrations and other responsible 
authorities, shall assist national organizations and enterprises in taking the 
necessary measures to remain sufficiently secure and resilient against Cyber 
Attacks. 
 Ensure that public and private critical national infrastructures are aware of the 
level of threat and implement appropriate Cyber Crime countermeasures. Public 
institutions and private companies and organizations must understand the real 
level of Cyber Threat to the infrastructure and put in place measures to improve 
the protection and preservation of national interest and sovereignty. 
 Assist companies that own and/or operate sensitive data to manage their cyber 
risks and vulnerabilities. 
5.6 The normative framework of the Agency and its ecosystem 
Since constructing the legal framework requires highly experienced bodies, the NCISA’s 
normative framework shall be built with the help of a strong and regular international 
collaboration and support that respects Lebanon’s sovereignty and constitution. The 
NCISA’s ecosystem includes major local partners, such as the Government, the Ministry 
of Telecommunications and its operators, OGERO, LEA, the beneficiary ministries, 
OMSAR, academic institutions, Internet Service providers in Lebanon, and professional 
associations. The ecosystem is supported by the international partners listed in the 
Strategy.  
The NCISA shall carry out the following steps in ensuring an adequate legal 
framework for Cyber Security: 
 Adapt and create a regulatory framework for new emerging technologies. To do 
so, NCISA shall regularly inform ministries, government institutions, local 
authorities, companies, and citizens about threats facing digital systems through 
the communication channels appropriate to each. 
 Prepare the legal environment to accommodate new digital products and services. 
 Develop Cyber Defense guidelines and implement Cyber Defense measures to 
significantly improve Cyber Security levels across computer networks.  

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
45 
 
 Issue rules for the authorization of security devices and mechanisms designed to 
protect, in information systems, information covered by national defense secrecy. 
 Participate in international negotiations and liaise with foreign counterparts. 
 Define and assess the security of the devices and services offered by providers, 
necessary for the protection of information systems and infrastructures. 
 Define the Cyber Security framework for the implementation of legally qualified 
electronic signatures. 
 Contribute to the preparation of the framework of accreditation and certification 
related to Cyber Security and legally binding electronic signatures and digital 
logs/traces/proofs. 
 Decide on the accreditation of recognized laboratories that may conduct digital 
security evaluations and certifications of IT products and systems (these legal 
provisions are not yet implemented in Lebanon). 
 Set a framework for accreditation, certification, and technical standardization 
related to Cyber Security systems in line with existing laws and regulations. The 
said framework shall be set in collaboration with concerned ministries, LEA and 
governmental institutions, each within its own jurisdiction. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
46 
 
6. 
Conclusion 
There are final, operation-critical, and strategic assumptions which must be highlighted in 
the National Cyber Security Strategy of Lebanon: 
 The present document urgently calls for compulsory, critical, operational action: 
The official creation of a National Cyber Security Information Agency. Without 
the NCISA, none of the following actions can be pursued or accomplished; 
 NCISA needs a solid commitment from the Government, which will enable the 
launching of multiple actions, such as correct and detailed operational planning, 
scheduling, and budgeting; 
 NCISA needs a firm, official commitment for an operational budgetary, without 
which, nothing can be accomplished. While it is impossible to define a precise 
budget at this very early stage, budget ranges can definitely be projected based on 
the action plan approval; 
 After the endorsement of the Strategy, the National Cyber Team created by the 
Prime Minister shall have a new mandate to support the Government in the 
transition phase with a clearly defined new mandate and partners to assist in the 
implementation of the Strategy; 
 If the steps stated in the Lebanon National Cyber Security Strategy above are not 
put in place, the country shall face the following dangers and risks: 
 Lebanon will continue to be listed as one of the most underdeveloped 
countries in the world, as per ITU global statistics and scoring and Cyber 
Security Index, that assess a country’s ability to deal with 21st Century 
Cyber Security needs and with the global fight against Cyber Crime threats, 
Information Warfare, and Cyber Terrorism; 
 All of Lebanon’s Governmental assets, markets and business sectors, and 
citizens shall be strongly and dangerously exposed to Cyber Threat. 
Economic losses, as well as fear, uncertainty, and doubts shall ensue in 
dealing with the on-going global digital transformation, in which Lebanon 
still lags very far behind; 
 Lebanon shall not be able to evolve, losing international competitiveness; 
 Poor protection from Cyber Threats, Cyber Attacks, and Cyber Crime 
attract Cyber Criminals. This in turn depletes trust in the country. Lebanon 
shall thus lose foreign investments, especially in the IT and ICT industries, 
despite the encouraging economic and business-enabling incentives, which 
the Lebanese Government has put in place during the past years; 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
47 
 
 Lebanon is home to a large number of registered and non-registered 
refugees, legal and illegal foreign workers, etc. These communities are in 
contact, directly or indirectly, knowingly or unknowingly, with countless 
organizations and entities (among them a large number of NGOs) both on 
the national territory and in their respective home countries. These 
populations are either very poorly or not at all supervised by the Lebanese 
Government and could thus be vulnerable to potential Cyber Attacks and 
could easily become a platform for potential Cyber Threats and other 
Cyber-criminal acts, which could place Lebanon under increased potential 
risks from organized crime; 
 All of the above shall contribute to feed the continued perception of 
Lebanon as an “under developed” country. 
 
Only a strong, cohesive, inclusive, institutionalized, 
and collaborative National Cyber Security Strategy, 
based on and addressing the identified Cyber 
Security Pillars can protect Lebanon, its public 
institutions, its private sector, and its citizens from 
the above threat, thanks to a codified, systematic, 
nation-wide, all-encompassing action plan. 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
48 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
Acronym 
Full Expression 
APT 
Advanced Persistent Threat 
BYOD 
Bring Your Own Device 
CCB 
Cyber Crime Bureau 
CEPOL 
European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training 
CERT 
Computer Emergency Response Team 
CTI 
Cyber Threat Intelligence 
DoS -- DDoS 
Denial of Service – Distributed Denial of Service 
EBIOS 
Expression des Besoins et Identification des Objectifs de Sécurité / 
Expression of Needs and Identification of Security Objectives 
ENA 
Public Administration National School of Lebanon 
EUROPOL 
European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation 
ICP 
Industrial Control Process 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IIOT 
Industrial Internet of Things 
INTERPOL 
International Crime Police Organization 
IOT 
Internet of Things 
ISF 
Internal Security Forces 
ITU 
International Telecommunication Union 
KPI 
Key Performance Indicator 
LEA 
Law Enforcement Agencies (Army, Internal Security Forces, 
General Security, State Security) 
NCISA 
National Cyber Security and Information System Agency (of 
Lebanon) 
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
OGERO 
Lebanese telecommunications company 
OIV 
Opérateur d’Importance Vitale ; critical infrastructure 
OMSAR 
Office of the Minister of State for Administrative 
SSH 
Secure SHell  
SSL 
Secure Sockets Layer  
SME 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
TETRA 
Terrestrial Trunked Radio 
UN 
United Nations  
UNICRI 
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research 
Institute 
UNODC 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes 
VPN 
Virtual Private Network 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
49 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
Expression 
Definition 
0-Day 
Vulnerability 
A vulnerability that is not known neither to the vendor, nor to the 
Cybersecurity or the hacking community. A zero-day vulnerability is 
also a software security flaw that is known to the software vendor 
but doesn’t have a patch in place to fix the flaw.  
Advanced 
Persistent Threat 
It is a stealthy computer network attack in which a person or group 
gains unauthorized access to a network and remains undetected for 
an extended period. The term's definition was traditionally associated 
with state sponsorship, but over the last few years there have been 
multiple examples of non-state sponsored groups conducting large-
scale targeted intrusions for specific goals. 
Botnet 
A botnet is a number of Internet-connected devices, each of which 
is running one or more bots. Botnets can be used to perform 
distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS attack), steal data, send 
spam, and allows the attacker to access the device and its 
connection. 
BYOD - Bring 
Your Own Device 
An enterprise policy used to permit partial or full integration of user-
owned mobile devices for business purposes. 
CSIRT – 
Computer 
Security Incident 
Response Team 
A group of people integrated at the enterprise with clear lines of 
reporting and responsibilities for standby support in case of an 
information systems emergency This group will act as an efficient 
corrective control, and should also act as a single point of contact for 
all incidents and issues related to information systems. 
Cloud Computing Cloud computing is the use of data center servers and software 
networks to dynamically allocate resources and run applications for 
remote end users. or Cloud computing is defined as the computing 
or processing of resources over the internet. These include storing of 
data, running application instances. Convenient, on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of resources that can be rapidly provisioned 
and released with minimal management effort or service provider 
interaction.  
Cloud Network 
Cloud network is a computer network within a cloud infrastructure 
on which provides connectivity to cloud-based applications, servers 
etc. or Cloud networking (and Cloud based networking) is a term 
describing the access of networking resources from a centralized 
third-party provider using Wide Area Networking (WAN) or 
Internet-based access technologies. 
Cloud Services 
A cloud service is any service made available to users on demand via 
the Internet from a cloud computing provider's servers as opposed 
to being provided from a company's own on-premises servers. 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
50 
 
Expression 
Definition 
Critical Systems 
Systems whose incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating 
effect on the economic security of an enterprise, community or 
nation.  
Cyber (Security) 
Incidents 
A malicious act or suspicious event that disrupts, or was an attempt 
to disrupt, the operation of those programmable electronic devices 
and communications networks including hardware, software and 
data that are essential to the Reliable Operation of the Bulk-Power 
System.  
Cyber Attack(s), 
Cyberattack(s), 
Cyber-Attack(s) 
An attempt by hackers to damage or destroy a computer network or 
system. The 10 most common cyber-attack types: 
- Denial-of-service (DoS) and distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) 
attacks. 
- Man-in-the-middle (MitM) attack. 
- Phishing and spear phishing attacks. 
- Drive-by attack. 
- Password attack. 
- SQL injection attack. 
- Cross-site scripting (XSS) attack. 
- Eavesdropping attack.  
Cyber crime(s), 
Cybercrime(s) 
Crimes that use computer networks or devices to advance other ends 
include: Fraud and identity theft (although this increasingly uses 
malware, hacking or phishing, making it an example of both 
"computer as target" and "computer as tool" crime) Information 
warfare.  
Cyber Dissuasion The action of discouraging an action or event through instilling 
doubt or fear of the consequences. 
Cyber Espionage Activities conducted in the name of security, business, politics or 
technology to find information that ought to remain secret. It is not 
inherently military. 
Cyber Hygiene, 
Cyber-hygiene  
Refers to steps that computer users can take to improve their 
cybersecurity and better protect themselves online. 
Cyber Security, 
Cybersecurity 
Cyber Security is the practice of defending computers, servers, 
mobile devices, electronic systems, networks, and data from 
malicious attacks. It's also known as information technology security 
or electronic information security. There is no universally accepted 
nor straightforward definition of cyber security. When comparing it 
to 'information security' some people regard it as overlapping, being 
the same thing. Or they may view information security as focused on 
protecting specific individual systems and the information within 
organizations, while cyber security is seen as being focused on 
protecting the infrastructure and networks of Computer Information 
Infrastructures. 
CyberSouth 
CyberSouth is a joint project of the European Union (European 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
51 
 
Expression 
Definition 
Neighborhood Instrument) and the Council of Europe. CyberSouth 
aims to strengthen legislation and institutional capacities on 
cybercrime and electronic evidence in the region of the Southern 
Neighborhood in line with human rights and rule of law 
requirements. 
Project area: Southern Neighborhood region. 
Initial priority areas: Algeria, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco and Tunisia. 
Cyber Space, 
Cyberspace 
The notional environment in which communication over computer 
networks occurs. Cyberspace refers to the virtual computer world, 
and more specifically, is an electronic medium used to form a global 
computer network to facilitate online communication. It is a large 
computer network made up of many worldwide computer networks 
to aid in communication and data exchange activities. 
Cyberspace's core feature is an interactive and virtual environment 
for a broad range of participants. 
Cyber Threat(s) 
The possibility of a malicious attempt to damage or disrupt a 
computer network or system.  
Cyber Warfare 
The use of computer technology to disrupt the activities of a state or 
organization, especially the deliberate attacking of information 
systems for strategic or military purposes. 
Cyber-Insurance  A cyber insurance policy, also referred to as cyber risk insurance or 
cyber liability insurance coverage (CLIC), is designed to help an 
organization mitigate risk exposure by offsetting costs involved with 
recovery after a cyber-related security breach or similar event. 
Cybernetics 
The science of communications and automatic control systems in 
both machines and living things. 
Cyberpunk 
A programmer who breaks into computer systems in order to steal 
or change or destroy information as a form of cyber-terrorism. 
Data Theft 
Data theft is the act of stealing computer-based information from an 
unknowing victim with the intent of compromising privacy or 
obtaining confidential information. 
Denial of Service, 
DoS 
A denial-of-service (DoS) is any type of attack where the attackers 
(hackers) attempt to prevent legitimate users from accessing the 
service. In a DoS attack, the attacker usually sends excessive 
messages asking the network or server to authenticate requests that 
have invalid return addresses. 
Distibuted Denial 
of Service, DDoS 
A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) is a DoS attack from multiple 
sources. 
Digital 
Transformation 
It is the novel use of digital technology to solve traditional problems. 
These digital solutions enable inherently new types of innovation and 
creativity, rather than simply enhance and support traditional 
methods. 
In a narrower sense, "digital transformation" may refer to the 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
52 
 
Expression 
Definition 
concept of "going paperless" or reaching a "digital business 
maturity" affecting both individual businesses and whole segments 
of society, such as government, mass communications, art, medicine, 
and science.  
EBIOS 
Expression of Needs and Identification of Security Objectives) is a 
method for analysis, evaluation and action on risks relating to 
information systems. It generates a security policy adapted to the 
needs of an organization. The method was created in 1995 and is 
now maintained by the ANSSI, a department of the French Prime 
Minister. 
e-services 
Services which use of information and communication technologies 
(ICTs). The three main components of e-services are- service 
provider, service receiver and the channels of service delivery. 
Exploit 
Software code taking advantage of a vulnerability to cause 
unintended or malicious behavior to occur on computer software 
and systems. rr 
Hack 
Unauthorized, non-documented use, break-in. 
Hacker 
Someone who knows “how to hack” – generally speaking, or an 
individual who attempts to gain unauthorized access to a computer 
system. 
Hacking 
The action of a Hacker while he/she hacks something / on 
something. 
Hacktivism 
Hacking summed up with activism. More precisely, it is the use of 
computer technology to promote a political agenda or a social 
change. 
Hacktivist 
Someone who carries out the act of Hacktivism. 
Insider Threats 
An insider threat is a malicious threat to an organization that comes 
from people within the organization, such as employees, former 
employees, contractors or business associates, who have inside 
information concerning the organization's security practices, data 
and computer systems. 
Legacy Systems 
It is an old method, technology, computer system, or application 
program, of, relating to, or being a previous or outdated computer 
system," yet still in use. Often referencing a system as "legacy" 
means that it paved the way for the standards that would follow it. 
Malicious Cyber 
Activitie(s) 
It is an activity, other than one authorized by or in accordance with 
the law, that seeks to compromise or impair the confidentiality, 
integrity, 
or 
availability 
of 
computers, 
information 
or 
communications systems, networks, physical or virtual infrastructure 
controlled by computers or information systems, or the information 
resident thereon.  
Ransomware 
Ransomware is malicious software that, in many cases, restricts 
access to a computer or a device and its data by encrypting its 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
53 
 
Expression 
Definition 
content and demanding that a ransom be paid, usually via a 
cryptocurrency such as bitcoin, in order for the victim to regain 
access to systems and information. Ransomware can also lock 
systems in various ways without the use of encryption, disrupting 
device performance. Actors may threaten to expose sensitive, 
personal, or embarrassing information unless a ransom is paid. 
Ransomware is typically installed using a trojan or a worm deployed 
via phishing or by visiting a compromised website. Ransomware is a 
type of malicious software, or malware, designed to deny access to a 
computer system or data until a ransom is paid. Ransomware 
typically spreads through phishing emails or by unknowingly visiting 
an infected website. 
Resilience 
The ability of an information system to continue to operate while 
under attack, even if in a degraded or debilitated state, and to rapidly 
recover operational capabilities for essential functions after a 
successful attack.  
Emergency 
Response Drills 
Exercises used to rehearse anticipated emergency scenarios. They are 
designed to provide training, reduce confusion, and verify the 
adequacy of emergency response activities and equipment." they are 
coordinated, supervised activities that are normally used to test a 
single specific operation or function; their role is to practice or 
perfect one small part of the response plan. 
Script Kiddies 
A person who uses existing computer scripts or codes to hack into 
computers, lacking the expertise to write their own. or in 
programming and hacking culture, a script kiddie, skiddie, or skid is 
an unskilled individual who uses scripts or programs developed by 
others to attack computer systems and networks and deface 
websites. 
Sextortion  
Sextortion is a form of sexual exploitation that employs non-physical 
forms of coercion to extort sexual favors from the victim. Sextortion 
refers to the broad category of sexual exploitation in which abuse of 
power is the means of coercion, as well as to the category of sexual 
exploitation in which threatened release of sexual images or 
information is the means of coercion. 
Social 
Engineering 
Social engineering refers to all techniques aimed at talking a target 
into revealing specific information or performing a specific action 
for illegitimate reasons.  
State Sponsored 
Threats 
The calculated use of violence (or the threat of violence) against 
civilians in order to attain goals that are political or religious or 
ideological in nature; this is done through intimidation or coercion 
or instilling fear. 
Threat 
Any circumstance or event with the potential to adversely impact an 
asset 
through 
unauthorized 
access, 
destruction, 
disclosure, 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
54 
 
Expression 
Definition 
modification of data, and/or denial of service.  
Unpatched 
Systems 
Unpatched software refers to computer code with known security 
weaknesses.  Once the vulnerabilities come to light, software 
vendors write additions to the code known as “patches” to cover up 
the security “holes.” Running unpatched software is a risky activity 
because by the time a patch emerges, the criminal underground is 
typically well-aware of the vulnerabilities. 
Virtual World 
A computer-based simulated environment which may be populated 
by many users who can simultaneously and independently explore it 
and participate in its activities and communicate with others. 
Vulnerability(ies) The existence of a weakness, design, or implementation error that 
can lead to an unexpected, undesirable event compromising the 
security of the computer system, network, application, or protocol 
involved. 
Work-From-
Home 
It is a concept where the employee can do his or her job from home.  

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
55 
 
ANNEXES 
 
 
Resolution no. 172/2018 
 
Appointing Dr. Lina Oueidat the Advisor to the Prime Minister for Informatics as 
the National Coordinator for ICT 
 
The Prime minister, 
 
In accordance to the Decree number 2 dated 18/12/2016 (nominating Mr. Saad Hariri as 
Prime Minister), 
In accordance with the agreement no 28/A dated 25/2/2017 between the Lebanese State 
represented by the Prime Minister and Dr. Lina OUEIDAT to undertake the duties of 
Advisor to the Prime Minister for Information & Communications Technology. 
 
Decides the following 
 
Article 1: Appointing Dr. Lina Oueidat the Advisor to the Prime Minister for 
Informatics Affairs to carry out the duties of the National Coordinator for 
Information & Communications Technology (ICT). 
 
Article 2: This decision shall be notified where necessary 
 
 
Beirut, dated 26/9/2018 
 
 
The Prime Minister 
Saad Hariri 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
56 
 
Resolution no. 173/2018 
 
Establishment of a national team to develop a plan to confront the dangers of 
cybercrime and prepare a national strategy for institutionalizing the work of cyber 
security 
 
The prime Minister, 
 
In accordance to the Decree number 2 dated 18/12/2016 (nominating Mr. Saad Hariri as 
Prime Minister), 
In accordance with the Public interest necessities. 
 
The following is Decided  
 
Article 1:  A National Team is established to develop a plan to confront the dangers of 
cybercrime and prepare a national strategy for institutionalizing the work of 
cyber security, composed of the following: 
- Secretary General of the High Council of Defense 
President 
- Representative of the Presiden of the Republic 
Member 
- Representative of the Parliament 
Member 
- Representative of the Ministry of Justice 
Member 
- Representative of the Ministry of Finance 
Member 
- Representative of the Army Command – Ministry of Defense 
Member 
- Representative of the General Directorate of Internal Security Forces 
Member 
- Representative of the General Directorate of General Security 
Member 
- Representative of the General Directorate of State Security 
Member 
- Representative of the General Directorate of Civil Status – Ministry of 
Interior and Municipalities 
Member 
- Representative of the Ministry of Telecommunications 
Member 
- Representative of the Office of the Minister of State for 
Administrative Reform 
Member 
- Representative of the Banque du Liban 
Member 
- Representative of the High Council for Privatization 
Member 
- Dr. Lina Oueidat National Coordinator for Information and 
Communications Technology 
Rapporteur 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
57 
 
The members shall be named by the Specialized Minister and the Heads of the 
departments concerned.  
 
Article 2:  the mission of the Team will be as follows: 
 
- Develop a plan to confront the dangers of cyber-crime and prepare a National 
Strategy for institutionalizing the work of cybersecurity 
- Conduct an assessment of the risks related to the preparation of the National Strategy 
for cybersecurity, combating Information crime and proposing the necessary 
priorities, plans and projects 
- Prepare the strategy for the work of cybersecurity in accordance with the road map 
prepared by the General Secretariat of the Supreme Council of Defense in 
coordination with the Commission of the European Union in Lebanon 
- Propose the institutionalization mechanism for the implementation of this strategy 
 
Article 3: The Team can seek the assistance of the persons deemed appropriate for the 
performance of its tasks. 
 
Article 4: The said team shall submit to the Prime Minister a periodic report every 
month and submit its final report within a period of six months from the date 
of the issuance of this resolution. 
 
Article 5: This decision shall be notified where necessary. 
 
 
Beirut, dated 26/9/2018 
 
 
The Prime Minister 
Saad Hariri 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
58 
 
Official National Cyber Security Team Members 
 
Administration 
Name 
Title 
The General 
Secretariat of the 
Higher Council of 
Defense 
Mahmoud AL ASMAR 
Major General – Secretary 
General of the Higher Council of 
Defense 
Brigadier General Wajdi 
CHAMSEDDINE 
Engineer – Permanent 
Representative in the Committee 
Presidency of the 
Council of Ministers 
Dr. Lina OUEIDAT 
Committee Rapporteur 
ICT Advisor to the Prime 
Minister 
Parliament 
Dr. Ali HAMIEH 
Advisor to the Chairman Media 
and Communications 
Commission 
Ministry of Justice 
Hania AL HELWE 
Judge 
Ministry of Finance 
George SAOUD 
Head of Informatics 
Army Command – 
Ministry of National 
Defense 
Antoine KAHWAGI 
Head of the Intelligence 
Technical Branch 
General Directorate of 
Internal Security 
Forces 
Khaled YOUSSEF 
Colonel – Engineer -Information 
Branch Engineer 
General Directorate of 
Public Security 
Jamal KASHMAR 
Colonel – Engineer – Head of 
Communications Department 
OGERO 
Dr. Toufic CHEBARO 
Senior Engineer 
General Directorate of 
State Security 
Hamza DAMAJ 
Captain Eng. Head of IT 
Department 
Ministry of 
Telecommunications 
Bassel AL AYOUBI 
General Manager of Investment 
and Maintenance 
OMSAR 
Ihab CHAABAN 
ICT Security Officer 
Banque du Liban 
Ali NAHLE 
Director of IT 
Special Investigation 
Commission 
Nasser LEBBOS 
Director of IT at the Banque du 
Liban 
High Council for 
Privatization 
Maya CHAMLI 
Project Manager 
Telecommunications 
Regulatory Authority 
Said HAIDAR 
Approval ,Quality and Standards 
Manager 
Ministry of Economy 
and Trade 
Dr. Linda KASSEM 
Legal expert 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
59 
 
Support of the European delegation in Beirut 
Administration 
Name 
Title 
European 
Commission 
Jérôme Ribault Gaillard 
Counter-Terrorism Expert 
 
 
List of additional members and voluntary participants 
Administration 
Name 
Title 
Presidency of the 
Council of Ministers 
Ahmad AL KHATIB 
Head of Informatics Department 
Army Command 
Ministry of National 
Defense 
Ahmad AL HAJJ 
CHEHADE 
Lieutenant Engineer, Intelligence 
Directorate 
President Carl IRANI 
Advisor to the Minister of 
Defense 
General Directorate of 
Internal Security 
Brigadier General Ahmad 
AL HAJJAR 
Commander of the Institute of 
Internal Security Forces 
General Directorate of 
Public Security 
Dr. Jihad FAHS 
Major –
 Engineer 
General Directorate of 
Personal Status 
George BECHARA 
National ID Platform 
Ministry of 
Telecommunications 
Nabil SHEIKH 
Engineer 
OMSAR 
Joe HAGE 
Advisor to the Minister 
Banque du Liban 
Zeina AOUN 
Information Systems and Cyber 
Security Expert 
Hubert BAZ 
Administrative 
Lebanese University- 
Faculty of Engineering 
Dr. Lina OUEIDAT 
Academic Collaboration 
Master's degree Cyber Security-
Habib El Amin Coordination 
Habib AL AMIN 
Saint Joseph 
University-ESIB 
Dr. Maroun CHAMOUN 
Tony FEGHALI 
Potech - Berytech 
Lebanese University 
Faculty of Law 
Pr. Mona AL ACHKAR 
JABBOUR 
Volunteer experts 
Dr. Bilal ABDALLAH 
ECS sarl 
Darwiche CHEHADE 
Mounif OUEIDAT 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
60 
 
Official Correspondence 
 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
61 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
62 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
63 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
64 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
65 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
66 
 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
67 
 
Roadmap for the Preparation of the National Cybersecurity 
Strategy and the Fight Against Cybercrime 
 
Document presented on September 13, 2018 to the European delegation in Beirut. 
 
Objectives  
Nations are faced with the obligation to go digital due to the rapid development of 
information and communication technologies (ICTs). The development of computer 
services, internet communications services and digital applications presents security 
challenges that require the State and its institutions to develop a national strategy to 
combat the different types of cyber threats and attacks whether internal or external. 
The standardization and multiplication of administrative electronic services and the 
development of technologies connecting directly State institutions and citizens present 
the risk of allowing unauthorized and potentially malicious entities to gain access to State 
information systems. To alleviate these problems, which are bound to increase in number 
and complexity, particularly with the rapid development of technology, it is incumbent on 
the State to implement, for its civilian and security organs, a strategic defense plan against 
these threats while reflecting on the institutionalization of this work to ensure its 
sustainability in accordance with a clear vision and structure. The most important axes of 
this strategy are:  
1. Defense, deterrence and reinforcement against threats from inside and outside.  
2. The continuous development of State capacities to support the development of 
information and communication technologies. Indeed, the State has an obligation 
to protect itself against various electronic threats, to be able to withstand and 
mitigate the effects of attacks, and to be resilient in the rapid recovery of its 
functions. It must ensure the quality, integrity, and reliability of its data especially 
when embarking on a rapid transformation to digital. Lebanon is lagging in these 
areas and has not put in place the legal, administrative and technical measures 
related to e-government. Transformation to digital is a difficult and risky task in 
the absence of a national strategy for data security and cybersecurity.  
3. Increase the level of computerization in public administrations through 
validated and systematized automation processes and methodologies carried out in 
parallel between and within administrations, in accordance with the evolution of 
the needs of the public sector and the expectations of the public authorities and 
citizens.  
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
68 
 
4. Promotion of the role of the security and intelligence services and 
strengthening the mutual cooperation and coordination with the support and 
supervision of the higher authorities (Presidency of the Council of Ministers and 
its associated bodies), in particular the General Secretariat of the Higher Defense 
Council under the authority of the Prime Minister ... 
5. Development of human resources, tools, technological components and 
their use, in partnership with the IT sector in public and private institutions, 
universities and associations concerned by this field, selected after a reliability 
survey.  
6. The institutionalization of the centralization of data security activities 
within the Presidency of the Council of Ministers. Indeed, ensuring electronic 
security at the national level requires the centralization of means of surveillance, 
exchanges of experience and information, technical support, the capitalization of 
skills, technological monitoring of developments in this field, and the fight against 
such challenges and terrorism, as well as organized crime and its ramifications.  
Note: The majority of countries have institutionalized their strategies at the national level 
and as part of government action. The condition for success is a high level of 
coordination among the different state agencies.  
In the absence of an administrative development strategy and what follows from it, 
Lebanon finds itself relegated to the rank of the countries most lagging in terms of 
cybersecurity according to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) of which 
Lebanon is a member and holding the rank 119 among 165 countries surveyed.  
Considering that the General Secretariat of the Higher Defense Council, which 
reports directly to the Prime Minister, has worked tirelessly to raise the level of awareness 
in the field of cybersecurity, 
Considering that the European Commission has presented a methodology for 
developing the cybersecurity plan and has expressed its willingness to assist the Lebanese 
State in this area, provided that the relationship between the Commission and the State is 
a centralized relationship in order to avoid fragmentation of efforts, and that the state is 
ready to express accurately its needs, and that to this end, the state proposes a unified 
road map, built on a clear strategy, as well as an executive device to implement this 
strategy accompanied by a well-defined financing plan and guaranteed results,  
Considering that the European Commission has already drawn up guidelines to 
support this vision of development for the benefit of military, security and judicial 
institutions, and is ready to mobilize the necessary expertise of the Member States in 
favor of an initiative centrally presented by the Lebanese State in this regard,  

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
69 
 
Considering that the Prime Minister and the General Secretariat of the Council of 
Ministers are in the process of drafting a plan for the modernization of the General 
Directorate of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers with the aim of transforming it 
into a state-of-the-art institution at the national level through the implementation of a 
gradual plan of automation of its functions. This plan also provides for a modernization 
of the management structure, particularly through the implementation of advanced 
computer technologies that necessarily take into account the security dimension through 
the centralization and securing of data,  
As a result of multiple working meetings, we agreed on the definition of a preliminary 
roadmap that includes the establishment of the National Commission against Cybercrime 
and for the Strengthening of Cybersecurity, that will be tasked with the preparation of a 
National Strategy for Cybersecurity and the fight against cybercrime and whose missions 
shall be:  
 
1. Development of a national strategy for the defense, deterrence and reinforcement 
against cyber-attacks and cybercrime.  
2. Participation in the preparation of the administrative structure of the national 
institution to be placed under the authority of the Presidency of the Council of 
Ministers and which will take charge of the implementation of the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy in its various components, and in a way that is not 
incompatible with the ongoing project of modernization of the Presidency of the 
Council of Ministers, especially in relation to information and communication 
technologies.  
3. Invitation of the various administrations and public sector organizations, military 
and civilian, who are involved in this endeavor to each appoint a representative to 
the National Commission to ensure the broadest participation of all stakeholders 
as well as the adherence to the Commission's guidelines on this subject which has 
become a full-fledged business sector given the multiplicity and complexity of 
tasks, techniques and procedures as well as the rapid development it is witnessing. 
The required expertise of that person and the type of administrative activity that 
(s)he is called upon to carry out will be determined in the general plan.  
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
70 
 
The participants in the commission:  
 Presidency of the Republic 
 Presidency of the Chamber of Deputies 
 Presidency of the Council of Minister – National Coordinator of Information 
and Communications Technology 
 General Secretariat of the High Defense Council 
 Ministry of Finance 
 Ministry of Defense – Army Command – Intelligence Directorate 
 Ministry of Interior and Municipalities – General Directorate of General 
Security – Internal Security Forces 
 General Directorate of State Security 
 Ministry of Telecommunications (General directorates - Ogero) 
 Bank of Lebanon - banking sector – Special Investigation Commission 
 Higher Council for Privatization 
 
 
The commission will be assisted by representatives of the following administrations:  
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigrants 
 Ministry of Economy and Trade 
 Ministry of Industry 
 Economic and Social Council 
 Telecommunications Regulatory Authority 
 Office of the Minister of State for Administrative Reform 
 Ministry of Education and Higher Education 
 Lebanese University 
 Other institutions and bodies 
 
 
 

 
June 2019 
LEBANON NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY 
71 
 
Work group 
 
For the Lebanese State 
 
Major General Saadallah Al Hamad  
Secretary General of the Higher Defense 
Council  
Brigadier 
General 
engineer 
Wajdi 
Chamseddine 
General Secretariat of the Higher Defense 
Council 
Brigadier General Tony Kahwaji 
Head of the Intelligence -Technical Branch 
Judge Hania Al Helweh 
Ministry of Justice 
Dr. Lina Oueidat 
Advisor to the Prime Minister for 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies - National ICT Coordinator 
 
 
For the European Union 
 
Mr. Jérôme Ribault-Gaillard 
Counter -Terrorism Expert 
 

