SE ‘

as
7

~~ CYBERSECURITY —__

“TOWARDS ASECURE

CYBERSPACE
2020-2023




NATIONAL

CYBERSECURITY

STRATEGY

TOWARDS A SECURE
CYBERSPACE
2020-2023



AA

CONTENTS

01

Executive Summary 7
Foreword 9
Glossary of Terms 11
Acronyms 12
Strategic Vision 12
Principles 12
Respect for and the promotion of 12
fundamental rights
Government Led 12
Risk based approach 13
Shared responsibility 13
Fostering an environment for economic 13
growth and innovation
International Cooperation 13
Introduction 14
National Context 15
Horizon 2030: The National Development 15
Framework for Belize
National Security and Defence Strategy 16
2017-2020
Belize’s Growth and Sustainable 16

Development Strategy (GSDS) 2016-2019
Baseline Assessment

03

Current status of cybersecurity:

. 18
An overview
Cybercrime 19
Legislative Framework 20
Critical Infrastructure 20
Priority Areas 21
Implementation 22
Governance Structure 23
Evaluation and Review 23
Annex | 24
Areas of Priority 24
Area of Priority 1: Develop the National
Legal Framework to adequately address 24
cybersecurity threats
Area of Priority 2: Develop a national
capacity for incident response and critical 27
information infrastructure protection
Area of Priority 3: Implement measures
to support Education, Awareness and 29
Workforce Development in cybersecurity
Annex 2 32
Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model
for Nations (CMM) - Belize comparative 32
table 2016 and 2018
Acknowledgement 35



NATIONAL

CYBERSECURITY

STRATEGY

TOWARDS A SECURE
CYBERSPACE
2020-2023

oo? National Cybersecurity Strategy —- Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



EXECUTIVE

SUMMARY

Cybersecurity impacts many actors within the public domain, including policymakers, the private
sector, law enforcement, academia and civil society; therefore, a multi-stakeholder approach
was used in the development of this Strategy. Cybersecurity risks! in this regard, should therefore
be analyzed within a broader context that also encompasses legal, economic and social factors,
contributing to a better management of cybersecurity threats and decision-making. Technology
is changing exponentially every day, and the threats surrounding these technologies are becoming
increasingly sophisticated. As our connectivity and dependence on Internet-based platforms and
services increase, so do our vulnerabilities and exposure to cyber threats. While this growth has
brought numerous opportunities for many nations, cyber threats have equally evolved in recent
years. This reality, therefore, requires the development of public policies that seek to ensure an
open and safe Internet for alll.

Developed through a multi-stakeholder approach, through the establishmentof an Inter-institutional
Cybersecurity Task Force, the Nationa! Cybersecurity Strategy of Belize seeks to establish a vision
to enhance the cybersecurity posture of Belize. Considering existing national plans and the level
of connectivity of the nation, a tiered approach was used to develop concrete and measurable
actions that can be taken to advance the capability of the nation to address cyber threats. As such,
in the development of the National Cybersecurity Strategy, the level of connectivity to the Internet,
as well as, the volume of cybercrimes that are committed in Belize were considered. These variables
were also used to determine the scope of the problem, existing cybersecurity gaps, capacities and
opportunities for public-private synergies in Belize.

In terms of connectivity, there has been a steady growth in the level of Internet penetration anc
connectivity ? The more connected people become the more avenues are open for cyberattacks. As
of 2018, the Internet penetration rate of Belize was recorded as being over 50% of the population, an
increase of over 40% since 2060. With respect to cybercrime, the Police Information Technology and
Cyber Unit (PITCU) the Belize Police Department (BPD) manages the investigations of cyber-relatec
crimes, as well as, those felonies that involve electronic evidence. The PITCU has investigated cases
of phishing, credit card and ATM fraud, as well as, other crimes that involve electronic evidence,
including drug trafficking. They have also received reports of cyberbullying, revenge porn and
identity theft. The PITCU holds a partnership with the Internet Watch Foundation, which facilitates
the international reporting and investigation of cases of child pornography*.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




Acknowledging the evolving dynamics of the cybersecurity landscape in Belize, the strategy
addresses three priorities pillars and includes actionable objectives to be realized over a period of
three (3) years:

It is essential to consider who or what entity will manage the inter-institutional relationships of
Belize’s cybersecurity landscape, act as a national and international point of contact to facilitate
cooperation, provide an advisory role in the development of programmatic interventions, and
perhaps most importantly, coordinate the execution, evaluation and reporting of the strategy’s
action plan. As such, this Strategy recommends, that a National Cybersecurity Coordinator,
under the auspices of the Ministry of National Security be appointed for the coordination of the
implementation of actions identified in this Strategy.

Finally, the Strategy recognizes the need to undertake a review of its achievements within eighteen
(18) months of its approval.

WN National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




FOREWORD

Itis without a doubt that the fourth industrial revolution is here. In the words of Professor Klaus
Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman of the World Economic Forum:

“This Fourth Industrial Revolution is, however, fundamentally different. It is characterised by a range
of new technologies that are fusing the physical, digital and biological worlds, impacting all disciplines,
economies and industries, and even challenging ideas about what it means to be human. The resulting

shifts and disruptions mean that we live in a time of great promise and great peril."

The Internet as a shared global resource encapsulates unimaginable possibilities. As we seek to
improve the standard of living of our peaple, we must harness the potential of this tool to capitalize
on the opportunities in the digital economy. However, this cannot be pursued in a vacuum, as
securing our engagement online from the onsetis a critical first step in ensuring we retain value in
whatever digital investments are made.

Why would | say this? Cyberspace has also become the fifth domain, along with air, sea, land and
space, requiring defence. With the increased frequency and sophistication of malicious cyber
activities, as a developing nationwe cannot afford tobe complacent. In today’s digital age, everyone
should care about cybersecurity. With the advancement in mobile technology for example, many
Belizeans are engaged online. Personal information on social media sites such as phone number,
email address, home address, and credit/debit card numbers and other information like photos
and opinions, etc. are being shared. Aside from social media sites, people share their details for
business reasons, and many have no idea how their information would be used. Further, another
challenge in this area is the global shortage of cybersecurity experts, and Belize is no exception.

With the above in mind, the strategic lines of action articulated in this document demonstrate,
among other things, two main concepts:

T. We as a Government recognize our cybersecurity gaps and challenges BUT at the same
time, we recognize that everything cannot be all fixed with a stroke of a pen and the
articulation of this document, therefore, we have identified three (3) key priority areas to
start our journey of building resiliency and protecting the Belizean people.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




2. We also recognize that ‘no man is an island’ and this must be a national effort. Relying
on, while cultivating our own homegrown talent, we will face this challenge recognizing the
need to institutionalize processes that will improve our overall cyber hygiene.

| must conclude by stating that this National Cybersecurity Strategy demonstrates a commitment
to strengthening Belize’s capabilities and national coordination to mitigate the impact of cyber
threats. It also recognizes the importance of having a strategic vision to address Cybersecurity.

| implore all Belizeans to embrace this new digital era with a consciousness that the protection
of the Internet is a shared resource. On behalf of the Government and people of Belize, | take this
opportunity to thank everyone that was engaged in the development process and contributed their
time, knowledge and talent to make this national cybersecurity framework possible.




LL

QW WE GG
\

For the purposes of Us document

Critical infrastructure: inciudes those sectors
whose assets, systams, and networks, whether
physical or virtucl, are considerech so vit
that their incapacitation or destruction would
have a cebiitating effect on security, nation
esanamic security, national public health or
safety, or any cornbination thereat.

Mgital Assets: is content that is stored digitally
and has value,

Gyber Education: inclucies technical and nen-
technical content at all levels to provide the
knowlecige and skills necessary to perform
oybersecurlty functions

Cyber Awareness: Involves providing
infarmation about existing threats anc takes
Into aecount knoy

avoid arrest.

Shishing: is the use of amoall Hf appear
to originate frorn a trusted? source, in order to
trick a user into entering vaiicl creciarntials at a
fake website. Typically the email and the web
site loaks fke they are part of a bank the user is

Revenge sory is a form of cyber bullying where
are publi posted. Off sexual images
an angry ex when the:
times, accounts of

as found th

aq) and

when the ex of a fernale politician gave ¢
images to the organization of a political rival,
images were published, causing her to resign,
which allowed the rival to run in the election to
take her place. Another name for revenge pon
is Non-Consensual Pornography (NCP).

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



Ss ©

= ——

~ ACRONYMS

BEL - Belize Electricity Limited PITCU- Police Information Technology and
BWS - Belize Water Services Cyber Unit

CITO - Central Information Technology Office BPD-Belize Police Department

NSCS - National Security Council Secretariat MNS- Ministry of National Security

PUC = Public Utilities Commission ATM-Automated Teller Machine

OAS- Organization of American States IT-Information Technology

CICTE- Inter-American Committee Against ICT- Information and Communication
Terroism Technology

STRATEGIC VISION

Recognizing the benefits that technologies in this new digital age can bring, the people of Belize
will work together to create a safe and trusted digital environment that will promote economic
growth and social inclusion for all.

PRINCIPLES

A comprehensive understanding of cybersecurity is paramount to keep pace with emerging
technologies and more sophisticated threats. Cybersecurity capacity should not only include the
protection of networks and systems, but also take into account the people that rely more and more
on Internet-enabled devices to conduct basic tasks. In that regard the following principles have
guided the development of the Strategy and will further guide its implementation.

Respect for and the promotion of fundamental rights

This Strategy recognizes that human rights apply online, as well as offline, and that cybersecurity
and human rights are mutually reinforcing. Thus this Strategy protects and promotes fundamental
rights and freedoms such as the right to privacy, freedom of expression, freedom of association,
freedom of assembly among others, in addition to being in line with Part Il of the Constitution of
Belize and the international instruments to which Belize is party to.

Government Led

Recognizing that the Government is one of the largest consumers of information technology
services, it commits to driving the objectives of this Strategy by adopting best practices in its
operations and lead by example in the implementation of the Strategy’s objectives.

WN National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



Risk based approach

With the understanding of the importance of Critical Infrastructure to the welfare of Belize,
the Strategy seeks to mitigate cybersecurity risks to acceptable levels by encouraging the
combination of cost benefit, acceptable risk and other qualitative and quantitative approaches
with the desired end result of the protection of Belizean people and economy.

Shared responsibility

Cybersecurity affects everyone and as a result it is a shared responsibility for all to exercise
cybersecurity best practices. Targeted awareness raising initiatives will be implemented through
the mobilization and partnership with civil society, academia and other interest groups across
Belize, to enable and empower end-users to keep themselves and their organizations safer online.

Fostering an environment for economic growth and innovation

Recognizing the importance of innovation and business development to our national economy, a
cyber-environment that is safe and conducive to such development will be fostered.

International Cooperation

The age-old statement ‘no-man is an island’ has become such a relevant concept in this digital
era. The need for comprehensive stakeholder cooperation has never been greater than itis today.
This Strategy focuses on the need to leverage international partnerships to investigate criminal
activities, build capacity and protect Belize’s cyberspace.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




This Strategy was developed in collaboration with the Government and stakeholders, to address
cybersecurity threats facing Belize, so as to provide guidance onkey actions to be taken to improve
Belize’s overall preparedness and responsiveness to these threats. This Strategy outlines the
principles and long-term goals that will form the basis and overall direction for the planning and
development of the national cybersecurity posture, including a plan of action outlining various
roles and responsibilities for implementation,

Cybersecurity ime
academia, and civil society, therefore a multi-stakeholder approach was used in the development
of this Strategy. Cybersecurity risks® in this regard, should therefore be analyzed within a
broader context that also encompasses legal, economic and social factors, contributing to a

cts many actors such as, policy-makers, private sector, law enforcement,

better management of cybersecurity threats and decision-making. Technology is changing
exponentially every day, and the threats surrounding these technologies are becoming
increasingly sophisticated. Our growing connectivity and dependence on Internet-based
platforms and services has significantly increased our exposure to cyber threats. While this growth
has brought numerous opportunities for many nations, cyber threats have equally evolved in
recent years. This therefore, requires the development of public policies that seek to ensure an
open and safe Internet forall. In order to mitigate the impact of these threats, a structural change
around cybersecurity is imperative. However, this structural change is only possible with national
coordination and international cooperation, as well as with the active participation of different
actors of society working in tandem. Globally, there is no ane fix for these ever-evolving cyber
threats, and governments recognize the need for collaboration and cooperation among states,
as well as all national cyber actors including the private sector, NGOs, academia, and citizens as
a part of the solution. To compound these issues, the trans-border nature of the Internet requires
strategic thinking, not only in how we adopt technological solutions for the creation of more
efficient services, but also in how we protect them.

National Cybersecurity Strategy —- Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




National Context

Similarly, the implementation of cybersecurity measures takes into account many other aspects
of a nation’s economic and developmental goals and plans. Therefore, in the development of the
Strategy, there was a recognition that cybersecurity considerations cannot be taken in isolation but
must be considered in the wider context of other policy decisions and national initiatives such as the
National Sustainable Tourism Master Plan 2030®, the National Growth and Sustainable Development
Strategy 2016-2019’, among others. The graphic below illustrates some of considerations and
policies that were taken into account during the development of this Strategy:

The Horizon 20308 vision, goals and strategies arose out of an analysis of the current socio-
economic situation of Belize, informed by a broad consultation process and review of existing
technical and policy studies. The framework included specific vision statements from
stakeholders including ‘Belizeans are capable of using state of the art technology which they
incorporate into productive enterprise[s].’ Listed among five important cross cutting issues
was a need to invest in education and a review of the education system to assess its strength
and weaknesses and the development of a long term investment plan. This review, as stated
in Horizon 2030, would define the human resources that are critical to closing the resource
gaps identified. This approach is critical especially in the field of cybersecurity as it has been
reported in several fora that there is a global cybersecurity skills gap, of which Belize is no
exception. The gap in Cybersecurity jobs are expected to reach 1.8 million by 2022, up 20%
from 1.5 million in 2015, according to the Center for Cyber Safety and Education’.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




e National Security and Defence Strategy 2017-2020°

The vision of the NSDS is for a Belize “of peace and tranquility, where citizens live in harmony with
the natural environment and enjoy a high quality of life. Belizeans are an energetic, resourceful
and independent people looking after their own development in a sustainable way”. Having
established itself on three main pillars, namely: 1. Maintain the Sovereignty and Territorial
Integrity of Belize; 2. Reduce Local and Transnational Crimes; 3. Provide the necessary
environment for a prosperous and stable Belize, the NSDS encompasses all factors identified
to be essential to the security, stability and prosperity of Belize and the protection of the
geopolitical space of Belize as defined by the Belize Constitution. As a part of the strategic
objectives the NSDS states that as an effort to reduce such occurrences and the resulting
harm to Belize’s sustainable development aspirations, there will be a provision of basic
equipment and capacity to effectively manage and control Belize’s land, sea, air, and cyber
space (emphasis added). As a nation we recognize cyberspace as a territory for protection.
The NSDS further states that ‘in order to build public consensus, multilateral cooperation,
and public-private partnerships to defeat transnational organized crime and local gangs,
we aim to build new partnerships with industry, private sector, academia, civil society and
non-governmental organizations to combat these networks that operate in the illicit and
licit worlds...[as well as] ..further international norms against tolerating or sponsoring crime
in all its forms, including in cyberspace especially as it relates to prostitution and sexual
abuse’(emphasis added). This is position is not a unique approach as many nations have
recognized cyberspace as the fifth domain, and as a nation we will continue to extend our
resources to protecting the all the borders of Belize, which is among the reasons for the
development of strategic approach to cybersecurity efforts.

@Belize’s Growth and Sustainable Development Strategy (GSDS) 2016-2019

Flowing from Horizon 2030, the GSDS is a strategic plan that places sustainable development
as a priority while striving to bring economic, social and environmental policies into balance.
The GSDS is based on the principles of sustainable development, and on three notable
drivers that are common to successful developing countries: a proactive role for the state,
tapping into global markets, and innovative social policy". Among the Critical Success
Factors for the GSDS, they identified CSF1, “Optimal National Income and Investment,” and
included as an action to ‘Build institutional capacity to encourage technological adaptation
and innovation while also taking into account climate change resilience considerations’.
This line of action encourages the adoption of technology to improve efficiency, productivity
and competitiveness. As stated in the GSDS, Capacity development processes will target
the technical skills needed to facilitate government's efforts to encourage innovation and
imitation. Notably, while technology will continue to revolutionize the way we do business,
broader and wider-spread use of technology will also bring its vulnerabilities. Therefore the
National Cybersecurity Strategy is designed to guide our nation to think of cybersecurity as
an automatic consideration for any investment that involves technology.

WN National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



Baseline Assessment

It is imperative when designing a strategy at the national level that an assessment is undertaken
to ensure, not only that the right areas of focus are identified, but also to determine what is being
done well and where the deficiencies lie. As such, in the development of the National Cybersecurity
Strategy, the level of connectivity to the Internet was consider to determine the scope of the problem,
cybersecurity capacities that exists was measured and finally, the volume of cybercrimes that are
committed in Belize was taken into account.

In terms of connectivity, there has been a steady growth in the level of Internet penetration and
connectivity”. The more connected people become the more avenues that open for opportunities
for cyberattacks. As of 2018, the Internet penetration rate of Belize was recorded as being over 50%
of the population, an increase of over 40% since 2000 (See Table).

The primary goal of information such as this is to implement measures to reduce risk. Ensuring an
understanding of ‘what is at risk’ helps to shape prioritization and resourcing for implementation.
Additionally, to measure existing capabilities to address the threats, in 2018, the Cybersecurity
Capacity Maturity Model for Nations (CMM)? assessment was undertaken, and the results
indicated that Belize, since it was last applied in 2016, was still between a start-up and a formative
level of maturity in regards to cybersecurity along the five dimensions of capacities that were
assessed. Thus, indicating the need for the development of this comprehensive framework.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




CURRENT STATU
OF CYBERSECURITY

With the ever increasing growth in connectivity, the dependence on Internet-based platforms
has grown simultaneously, along with increased exposure to cyber related crimes. Despite the
development and deployment of sophisticated cyber security solutions, patches, and updates,
there has been a continuous increase in the number of cyber-attacks globally. For example, in
2018, a series of attacks from a group called ‘Magecurt’ took place. This group was responsible
for publicized breaches, including Ticketmaster and Feedify. With this, in addition to the recent
spate of ransomware attacks on other targets such as FedEx, San Francisco’s light-rail network,
and Britain’s National Health Service, it is clear that the frequency and complexity of attacks
have increased.

An undeniable fact, is that many nations and organizations are struggling to keep pace with
cybercriminal activities. The costs of cybercrime have been estimated to have quadrupled since
2015, reaching $2.1 trillion by the end of 2019 and outpacing spending on cybersecurity by over 16
times”. Gartner forecasts that industry spend in 2018 will reach $93 billion, as traditional security
measures such as firewalls and anti-virus software prove to be inadequate”.

Cybersecurity has now become anincreasing partof the national dialogue in Belize, with discussions
to address this issue being staged among different sectors of the country. Over the past few years,
several government agencies have also been working in order to address cybersecurity. Since 2014,
the Ministry of National Security has been working on coordinating this at the national level and
had organized a Cybersecurity Ad Hoc Committee, made up of multiple stakeholders, including
academia and the private sector, to work together on building awareness about cybersecurity
and cybercrime in Belize. Since then an inter-institutional cybersecurity task force, led by the PUC,
NSCS, CITO and comprising a cross section of national stakeholders (both public and private
sector, academia and civil society groups) was established in 2018 and was instrumental to the
development of this Strategy.

National Cybersecurity Strategy — Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




Cybercrime

The Police Information Technology and Cyber Unit (PITCU) of Belize Police Department (BPD)
manages the investigations of cyber-related crimes, as well as those felonies that involve electronic
evidence. The PITCU has investigated cases of phishing, credit card and ATM fraud, as well as other
crimes that involve electronic evidence, including drug trafficking. The PITCU have also reported
that they have received reports of cyberbullying, revenge porn and identity theft. In terms of some
international collaboration to counter cybercriminal activities, the PITCU holds a partnership with
the Internet Watch Foundation in order to report cases of child pornography". Below is a summary
of cybercrimes recorded over the last five years.




As recent as August 2018, it was reported that there were phishing scams targeting the Belizean
Public’. Given the prevalence of theft of mobile devices in Belize, PITCU has been paying close
attention because many cyber-related crimes are being executed through stolen devices.

Legislative Framework

Given that there is no comprehensive criminal legislation that strictly address cybercrime, the
prosecution of these crimes have been difficult. Currently, Belize has several legislations that relate
to cybercrime'®: the Telecommunications Act-CAP. 229 and 2298S", the Electronic Evidence Act-CAP.
95:01°°, the Electronic Transactions Act-CAP. 29:01", the Intellectual Property Act, the Interception of
Communications Act CAP. 229:01” and the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act- CAP.
103:017°. With this legislative gap, there is a great need for the development of a comprehensive
cybercrime bill that is tailored to the reality of Belize.

Critical Infrastructure

Cyber-attacks against critical infrastructure are a reality. These threats goes well beyond the risk
of an information breach or an unavailable information system, but potentially impacts the lives
of our citizens should critical infrastructure be impacted. There is a need to begin the dialogue
among key stakeholders, which may include but not limited to ministries and other entities with
responsibility for energy, food security, banking and finance, communication, transportation,
health and security. For instance, the protection of our democracy as a nation is paramount and
in this digital age, the digital assets supporting our democratic processes could be considered
a critical infrastructure, given the destabilizing impact on society that could occur if they are
rendered inoperable or unreliable.

This is critical as Latin American and Caribbean region is not insusceptible to cyber-attacks. In
2015, the OAS and Trend Micro released a report” which highlighted the reality regarding attacks
that negatively impact the critical infrastructure of the region. According to the Report, 44 percent
of respondents reported being aware of different types of destructive attacks, while 40 percent
said they had experienced attempts to shutdown cybernetic systems. In 2018, an updated report?®
was released in collaboration with Microsoft, which indicated that 69 percent of respondents
indicated they have noticed an increase in the number of attacks to their computer systems and/
or networks over the last 12 months, and 57 percent of the respondents indicated they did not have
a dedicated budget for cybersecurity measures, even though in 59 percent of those respondents
with a dedicated budget, indicated that their budgets have increased within the last year. This kind
of data emphasizes the need to ensure that Critical Infrastructure is addressed directly because of
the risk if left unattended.

WN National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




PRIORITY AREAS

Taking into account the state of cybersecurity readiness of Belize and the developmental goals for
the coming years, this Strategy has identified three areas of priority which will be focused on for the
next four years. The aim of these priority areas is to build the capacity of Belize to better address
cybersecurity threats. Each area identified will include specific activities that address gaps such
as the capability to identify and respond to cyber incidents. The other aim is to increase the overall
awareness of not only government personnel on threats and tools needed to counter them but
the general citizenry. Additionally, recognizing the need to have a comprehensive legislative
framework in place, the Strategy outlines critical steps that can be taken to better enable the
legislative posture of Belize to address cybercrime as a security risk.

The following diagram summarizes the areas identified as priority for the Strategy.



L

Effective implementation can only be achieved if a governance and monitoring process that
takes into account all stakeholders, their competencies and contributions is implemented. This
collaboration between and sense of ownership by stakeholders, can take into account all the
various areas that impact the successful implementation of the Strategy, this includes sourcing
technical capability, budget, talent recruitment, international cooperation. Collaboration and
information sharing should be mutually beneficial for all and take into account the objectives the
Strategy is aiming to achieve. The diagram below outlines all the various factors that should be
taken into account for the implementation and monitoring of the Strategy.



Governance Structure

The incredibly complex challenges inherent to cybersecurity require a whole- of-nation
approach guided by multiple agencies, partners and stakeholders . A Governance structure,
therefore, is needed for the identification of roles and responsibilities and overall responsibility
for the implementation of the areas of priorities identified in this document, as well as related
national cybersecurity initiatives. This Strategy recognizes the need to take into account existing
governance frameworks, for example, in relation to the areas identified that may require legislative
changes, the responsible institutional actors will prepare and submit accordingly (i.e. the Office of
the Attorney General and Office of the Solicitor General respectively).

It is essential in this regard to consider who will manage inter-institutional relationships, act as a
national and international point of contact, communicate and provide an advisory role in general
regulations, follow-up and evaluation of measures. As such this Strategy recommends, that a
National Cybersecurity Coordinator, under the auspices of the Ministry of National Security be
appointed for the coordination of the implementation of actions identified in this Strategy. As
a consultative body, the Inter-institutional Cybersecurity Task Force that was established for the
development of the Strategy, should also be called upon on a periodic basis to provide advice on
the areas of priorities identified in relation to their primary areas of responsibilities.

Evaluation and Review

Finally, metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of the objectives and activities articulated in this
Strategy are needed and as such an evaluation of the Strategy will be undertaken eighteen (18)
months after its approval.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




Areas of Priority

The realization of the strategic vision of this Strategy will be based on the strategic objectives
below. These objectives and activities have been developed by identifying the most important
focal points and articulating a timeline within which they should be completed, broken down as
follows:

* Short-Term: 6 months
* Medium-Term: 1 year
* Long-Term: 2 years

Area of Priority 1:
Develop the National Legal Framework to adequately address cybersecurity threats

This component contemplates the review of the existing legal framework that impacts
cybersecurity initiatives including legislation related to digital evidence, data protection, etc.,
with the goal of providing procedural tools for investigators and prosecutors of digital related
crimes. Additionally, this priority recognizes the need to provide tools to end-users. Based on
the interaction of all relevant stakeholders, minimum security standards must be defined to
ensure effective prevention and to achieve a common understanding of current requirements.

NY National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




Objectives:
Feasibility assessment of data retenion/digital
evidence regulation conducted

Activities:

1.1 Conduct consultation with all relevant
stakeholders with the view of identifying gaps and
recommendations for drafting instructions for
new legislation

Objectives:
Minimum security standards included for
information systems used in critical infrastructure

Activities:

2.1 Identify critical information infrastructure for
minimum standards — incidents response

2.2 Develop minimum security standards for
information systems used in critical infrastructure
— incidents response

2.3 Establish a working group with the mandate
to review common threats and provide
recommendation for standards according to
industry.

Objectives:
Drafting Instruction for Legislation to address
cybercrime submitted to Cabinet for approva

Activities:

3.1 Establish a legal working group to provide
recommendation for drafting instructions for a
draft Cybercrime Bill

3.2 Consult with international organizations such
as the Council of Europe and Organization of
American States for technical assistance for the
development of the Cybercrime Bill

3.3 National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS)
to request AG to draft cybercrime bill and consult
with key stakeholders for input

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: PUC

Partners: IT Service Providers, Attorney General,
CcITO

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: PUC
Partners: Ministries with responsibility for:
+ Immigration
+ Tourism
+ National Security
+ CITO
Central Bank Stakeholders from:
* BEL
- BWS
+ Energy
+ Transport
+ Health
* Communication
+ IT Service Provider

Timeline:
Long Term

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: CITO

Partners: NSCS

Attorney General,

Ministry with responsibility for National Security,
PUC

Timeline:
Medium Term




4 Objectives:

Judiciary and Prosecu-tors sensitized on technical
concepts, popular methods of cybercrime,
technologies used in committing cybercrime,
level of crime

Activities:

4.1 National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS)
and Police Information Technology and Cyber
Unit (PITCU) of Belize Police Department (BPD) to
conduct Quarterly briefings

4.2 Consult/dialogue with judiciary for training
needs

4.3 Organize training for the judiciary and
prosecutors

Objectives:

Ministry of Foreign Affairs National Security &
Attorney General's Office participate in bilateral
and multilateral international cybersecurity
agreements

Activities:

5.1Government to review the process for
acceding to the Convention on Cybercrime
(Budapest Convention)

5.2 Consider signing CARICOM Treaties and other
bilateral and multilateral treaties (extradition and
evidence sharing) as needed

Objectives:
Capacity of Police In-formation Technology and
Cyber Unit (PITCU) of Belize Police De-partment (BPD)

Activities:

6.1 Source training in investigation of digital crimes
6.2 Leverage international and regional partners
to access annual training (e.g. OAS Annual
Summer Bootcamp)

6.3 Creation of a manual to provide guidance on:
(i) Evidence collection, (ii) evidence storage and
(iii) first responders to a crime scene in digital

SN

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead:
Belize Police Department (BPD)

Partners:

NSCS,

Judiciary,
Registrar General

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: NSCS

Partners: Ministry with responsibility for Foreign
Affairs,

Attorney General

Timeline:
Short Term

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: Belize Police Department (BPD)
Partners:

Office of the Director of Public Prosecution,
Ministry with responsibility for Foreign Affairs,
Attorney General

Timeline:
Medium Term

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



7 Objectives:
Tracking and Analysis of cybercrime incidents
improved

Activities:

7.1 Update Belize Police Information Technology
and Cyber Unit website to include cybercrime
reporting.

7.2 Create an App for reporting cybercrimes e.g.
cyberbullying

@ Area of Priority 2:

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: Belize Police Department (BPD)
Partners: CITO

Timeline:
Medium Term

Develop a national capacity for incident response and critical information infrastructure

protection

This component contemplates the review of the existing legal framework that impacts cybersecurity
initiatives including legislation related to digital evidence, data protection, etc., with the goal of
providing procedural tools for investigators and prosecutors of digital related crimes. Additionally,
this priority recognizes the need to provide tools to end-users. Based on the interaction of all relevant
stakeholders, minimum security standards must be defined to ensure effective prevention and to
achieve a common understanding of current requirements.

1 Objectives:
Feasibility assessment of data retenion/digital
evidence regulation conducted

Activities:

1.1 Develop a dialogue with key sectors in a
phased approach to adopt an information
sharing protocol. e.g. Central Bank use of Traffic
Light Protocol.

1.2 Identify a list of sectorial Cybersecurity Incident

Response Teams (CIRT).

2 Objectives:

Minimum security standards included for

information systems used in critical infrastructure

Activities:

2.1 Develop a roadmap for the establishment of a
National CIRT.

2.2 Develop the framework for the CIRT.

2.3Train incident response personnel and develop

strategic capacity.

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: CITO

Partners: Central Bank,
Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: CITO

Partners: PUC,

Central Bank

Timeline:
Short-Mid Term




3 Objectives:
User-friendly mechanisms for citizens to report
incidents developed

Activities:

3.1 Develop a publicly available reporting
mechanism for citizens to report incidents.

3.2 Establish a Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group
(community) focused on community awareness.
3.3 Implement a National Public awareness
campaign to sensitize the public on the
availability of the reporting tool

Objectives:
International Cooperation and new partnerships
established

Activities:
4.1 |dentify International Partner agencies to help
build capacity and collaborate on incidents such as:
+ CSIRTAmericas.org
+ LACNIC WARP
+ Commonwealth Telecommunications
Organisation

Objectives:

Measures to protect services defined as critical
that are essential for the functioning of the
economy established

Activities:

5.1 Conduct Risk/Threat Assessment and identify
classify all technology assets which support
critical information systems

5.2 Obtain full understanding of critical system
and information availability requirements based
on agency priorities and mandates

5.3 Develop incident response and recovery plans
that facilitates the measurement, detection,
mitigation, and monitoring of cyber incidents for
critical assets.

5.4 Implement an awareness campaign on the
importance of standards and their adoption to
operators and owners of critical infrastructure

SN

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: Belize Police Department (BPD)

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: Belize Police Department (BPD)

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead:

Central Bank

CITO

Partner: Ministry with responsibility for National
Security - NSCS

Timeline:
Long Term

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



@ Area of Priority 3:
Implement measures to support Education, Awareness and Workforce Development in
cybersecurity

The reality is that there are simply not enough skilled personnel available in cybersecurity, and if
there is personnel most government employees utilize technology to perform their duties. Therefore,
they need to be informed about the severe consequences that may arise from just one mistake.
Additionally, the cybersecurity workforce is a diverse group of practitioners who govern, design,
defend, analyze, administer, operate, and maintain the data, systems, and networks, therefore
building a pool of talent in Belize, will serve to benefit the country as technology advances. This
component seeks to raise the level of national awareness as well, on key cybersecurity issues and
focuses on specific messaging for targeted audiences. The importance of security awareness
training in government cannot be overemphasized. Just as awareness training in the health sector
can help improve the standard of living and avoid certain diseases, so security awareness mitigate
consequences of cyber incidents. By promoting an awareness of digital rights, recognizing that this
issue, if treated as a human right is a concern for everyone, efforts will be made to build campaigns
to help the public understand that cybersecurity is a shared responsibility.

| Objectives: Coordinating Institutions:
Initiatives and policies that supports the Lead: Ministry with responsibility for Education and
development of a cybersecurity workforce defend, | Technology
analyze, administer and maintain the data, Partners: Belize Chamber of Commerce and
systems, and networks developed Industry, University of Belize Association of

Computing Machinery Student Chapter

Activities:
1.1 Review existing workforce development Timeline:
frameworks such as the National Initiative for Long Term

Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity
Workforce Framework to identify specialty
areas, work roles, tasks, and knowledge, skills,
and abilities needed to develop a national
cybersecurity workforce survey

1.2 Undertake a cybersecurity workforce study
using the survey to determine skills gap needed
at the national level

1.3 Undertake consultation with universities
including University of Belize and the University
of the West Indies, to identify specific course
curriculum needed based on cybersecurity
workforce study results and create a national
training catalog of cybersecurity related courses
available nationally

1.4 Develop a national training/workforce
development plan that leverages on existing
educational of-ferings (certificates, degrees,
etc.) and incorporates gaps identified in the
cybersecurity workforce study

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




2 Objectives:
Mapping of key stakeholders developed and
targeted awareness campaigns implemented

Activities:

2.1 Undertake consultation with all relevant
stakeholders including NGOs, educational
institutions, etc. to determine needs of the various
target groups for cybersecurity awareness (e.g.
indigenous communities, parents, teachers,
vulnerable groups, women, etc.)

2.2 Map various initiatives that exists that

can be utilized for incorporating or delivering
Cybersecurity awareness messaging

2.3 Implement awareness campaigns at the
District and Village level taking into account
cooperation with town councils, village councils
and community councils.availability of the
reporting tool

Objectives:
The general public is sensitized, educated and
empowered on relevant cybersecurity topics

Activities:

3.1Prepare a Cyber Security Communication
Strategy, with a view to improve communication to
stakehold-ers on cyber threats and available tools.
3.2 Develop television ads, jingles and news clips on
key cybersecurity messages (Phishing, Grooming,
sextortion, Cyberbullying, Privacy, sexting)

3.3 Issue public facing messages through mediums
such as text blasts, with key cybersecurity
messages

3.4 Organize competitions among youth, in areas
such as visual art, digital, written focused on
cybersecurity

3.5 Adopt international cybersecurity awareness
mes-saging services such as Get Safe Online
website or STOPTHINKCONNECT

3.6 Collaborate with Internet service providers, such
as, Digi and Speednet at Expos for distribution of
printed cyber awareness information and train-the-
trainer initiatives focused on messaging developed.
3.7 Put out information on Large LED TVS and Bill-
boards with Cyber Awareness info and catchy lines
such as #belnternet awesome

SN

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: Ministry with responsibility for Education and
Technology

Partners: Belize Network of

Non-Government Oraganizaitons,

AdamsCon,

Ministry with responsibility for Education, Ministry
with responsibility for National Security

Timeline:
Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: Ministry with responsibility for Education and
Technology

Partners:

ADAMScon

Speednet

Ministry with responsibility for Education, Ministry
with responsibility for National Security

Digi, Speed net and

cITO

Timeline:
Short Term
Short Term
Short Term
Medium
Term

Short Term
Long Term

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023



4 Objectives:

Youth educated on cybersecurity threats and tips
to stay safe online

Activities:

4.1 National campaign that goes from the bottom
up: include different languages target youths and
issues facing them

4.2 Include cyber component to existing forums
(e.g. ICT for girls)

Objectives:
International Cooperation and new partnerships
established

Activities:

5.1 Develop a survey on level of awareness
nationally to develop a baseline of the target
group

5.2 Develop survey to measure the impact of the
various awareness campaigns

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023

Coordinating Institutions:

Lead: Ministry with responsibility for Education
Partners:

Local universities

High Schools

NGOs

PUC

Timeline:
Medium Term
Short-Medium Term

Coordinating Institutions:
Lead: NSCS

Partners:

Ministry with responsibility for Education

Timeline:
Long term




Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for Nations (CMM) - Belize
comparative table 2016 and 2018

In that regard the Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for Nations (CMM) was implemented in
2016 and again in 2018 for Belize. The assessment tool is used to measure the level of maturity of a
nation in regards to cybersecurity across five different dimensions (see sidebar “Dimensions of the
Cybersecurity Maturity Model”.) Each dimension provides several indicators of cyber capacity (an
average of 10 indicators per dimension) in order for a nation to understand the stage of maturity in
each specific consideration. These indicators are measured across five levels of maturity: Start-up,
Formative, Established, Strategic and Dynamic. The stages of maturity vary from an initial stage of
maturity where a nation may have just begun to consider cybersecurity, through to a dynamic stage
where a nation is able to quickly adapt to changes in the cybersecurity landscape, by balancing
threat, vulnerability, risk, economic strategy or changing international needs, while at the same time
improving its posture and readiness to face new threats.

Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy Identifying whether countries have comprehensive national
cybersecurity policies that identify stakeholders’ roles, responsibilities in order to ensure a coordinate
and cohesive cybersecurity framework including their cyber defense outlook.

Cyber Culture and Society Understanding the different mind-sets in terms of cybersecurity
(government, private sector and society), identifying national cybersecurity awareness campaigns
and privacy policies, as well as how is the level of trust in the use of online services (e-government and
e-commerce).

Cybersecurity Education, Training, and Skills Identifying the availability of training and education in
cybersecurity and the availability of skilled labor force in this field.

Legal and Regulatory Frameworks Legislation related to information and communications technologies
(ICT), privacy, human rights, data protection, as well as substantive and procedural cybercrime law.

Standards, Organizations and Technologies The adoption of standards, the presence of incident
response teams and command and control centers, national infrastructure resilience, critical national
infrastructure protection, crisis management, cybersecurity insurance, and digital redundancy.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

ey

Itis important to acknowledge the contribution of the following entities for their dedication and
participation in the development and successful completion of the Strategy:

Belize Association of ICT Professionals
Belize Port Authority
Attorney General's Ministry
Belize Defence Force
Belize Police Department
Belize Telemedia Limited
Broadband Belize
Central Bank of Belize
Central Information Technology Office
Belize Chamber of Commerce and Industry
AdamsCon
Judiciary (Supreme Court)
Ministry of Education
Ministry of National Security
National Security Council Secretariat
Police Information Technology and Cyber Unit

Public Utilities Commission

National Cybersecurity Strategy- Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




FOOTNOTES

1 - This includes threats or vulnerabilities in networks, computers, programs and data, flowing
from or enabled by connection to digital infrastructure, information systems, or industrial control
systems, the Internet, etc. Cyber riskis commonly defined as exposure to or the potential of harm
or loss resulting from breciches of or attacks on information systems or infrastructure {RSA.com}

2 - https://dataworldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=B

mM

3 - IWF Belize Reporting Portal - https://reportiwt.org.uk/be/

4 - https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/common-cyberattacks.htrn!

5 - This includes threats or vulnerabilities in networks, com puters, programs and data, flowing
from or enabled by connection to digital infrastructure, information systems, or industrial control
systems, the Internet, etc. Cyber riskis commonly defined as exposure to or the potential of harm
or loss resulting from breciches of or attacks on information systems or infrastructure {RSA.com)
6 - http://tourism.gov.bz/nstmp/

7 - http://cdn.gov.bz/mot.gov.bz/files/FINAL%20GS DS _March_30_2016.paft

8 - http://med.gov.bz/wp-content/ uploads /2016/10/Horizon203 Cexecutivesummary pdt

9 - httos://www.forbes.com/sites/martenmickos/2019/06/19/the-cybersecurity-skills- gap-wont-
be-soalved-in-a-clas sroom/#3 BfS87Gcic30

10 - http: /wwaw. co G ¥7,02/ doestationfeom_docstation/3 9/national_security_a nd_defence_
strategy_2017 _2020,pdf

Tl - Growth and Sustainable Development Strategy Belize 2016-2019

mM

12 - https://dataworldbank.org /indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=B

13 - Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for Nations - https:/ /waww.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecurity-
capacity/content/cybersecurity-capacity-maturity-model-nations-cmm-0

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




~ httos:/ /www.weforum.org/agencda/20ie/ Ole

YS ~ httosy fwarwweforum.org/agenda/2018/
attacks-noarri-ere:/

{8 ~ WF Belize Reporting Portal ~ pttps://

i

AIWLCHT nberqristoday. cam {mews

We https:
public

(8 » Cybersecurity- Are we reacly |
publications jadb.org/en/eybersecurity-are-we

worg/web/lawacimin inc

SHOWA. OF rqfwe ab/iawadmin/in

ze%20rev20il/Law’ aos

SHtSS.OCS,
S20anadeZociPwes0

e Summary Assessment ~

National Cybersecurity Strategy - Towards A Secure Cyberspace 2020-2023




