 
 
 
 Provisional Translation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
                   
               
 
     
 
           
 
                                  
 
                             
                           
 
                        
 
                             
 
                      
 
                
                             
           
                         
 
                                  
 
                
                                               
     
                       

 
2 
 
                       
 
             
 
                      
 
                
 
    
 
                                  
                       
 
                                  
 
             
 
                                  
 
                            
 
                            
 
                                  
 
        
 
                                        
                                         
                                   
 
         
 
                             
 
                             
 
 
 

 
3 
 
It has been 8 years since the National Information Security Center (NISC) was 
established in the Cabinet Secretariat in April of 2005 and the Information 
Security Policy Council (ISPC) was established in the Strategic Headquarters for 
the Promotion of an Advanced Information and Telecommunications Network 
Society (IT Strategic Headquarters) in May of the same year for the purpose of 
drastically strengthening measures for information security issues.  
During this time, the ISPC determined the "First National Strategy on 
Information Security", the "Second National Strategy on Information Security" 
and the "Information Security Strategy for Protecting the Nation", working 
towards improving the level of information security within Japan while 
balancing between assuring free flow of information and precisely dealing with 
risks. 
The information security environment changes extremely quickly. In the 3 
years since the determination of the previous strategy, risks have become 
increasingly serious, more diffuse and more globalized. "Cyber attacks" against 
government institutions and critical infrastructures have become a reality and 
have become both "national security" and "crisis management" issues. At 
present, the introduction of the best possible measures for protecting the 
government institutions and critical infrastructures has become essential.  
We are entering an age, where everything is connected to the internet, called 
the Internet of Things. This is an age where everything faces information 
security risks. Risks are also increasing even for control systems which are not 
connected to the internet. Accordingly, this means that information security 
measures are becoming essential for every aspect of people's daily lives. 
Information security has become an issue directly linked to the "stability of 
people's daily lives" and "economic development".  
Our country is working towards constructing a "world's most advanced IT 
nation". The world's most advanced IT nation must also realize a "safe 
cyberspace" suited to the title. In order to construct a safe cyberspace within this 
fast changing environment, not only is ensuring information security by each 
individual stakeholder necessary as ever, but the contribution of every 
stakeholder related to cyberspace has also become necessary.  

 
4 
 
Thus, this strategy has been named the "Cybersecurity Strategy" in order to 
make clear the necessity to widely promote measures related to cyberspace and 
approach of these measures as distinguished from efforts for assuring 
"information security" up until now.  
As this strategy recognizes that a level of measures is required greater than 
those that came before, it presents a variety of new issues. We expect that this 
strategy, including these issues, will be steadily implemented, and that this will 
lead to the fast realization of a "Cybersecurity Nation" with a "world-leading, 
resilient and vigorous cyberspace". 
 

 
5 
 
 
① "Merger and integration" of cyberspace and real-space 
"Cyberspace," global virtual spaces such as the internet, composed of 
information systems, information communications networks and similar systems 
and which circulate large quantities of a large variety of information, have 
rapidly expanded and begun permeating real-space. At present, cyberspace 
serves as an indispensable brain and nervous system for nearly every activity 
including peoples' daily lives, socioeconomic activities and governmental 
activities, and the merger and integration of cyberspace and real-space 
continues.1 
The expansion and penetration of cyberspace is a result of the propagation 
and advancement of information communications technologies and the progress 
of the use and application of those technologies. Specifically this includes the 
spread of broadband infrastructure to every region of the country, as well as the 
propagation and advancement of smart devices, IPv6, M2M2/sensor networks, 
cloud computing services and others.3 and the use and application of these in a 
variety of fields including electronic commerce, medical, educational, 
transportation, social infrastructure management and e-government. 
                                                  
1 For example, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications "2012 White Paper on Information 
and Communications in Japan" (Hereinafter "White Paper on Information and Communications") states, 
"The internet has become an essential infrastructure for socioeconomic activities in global society", the 
National Police Agency "White Paper on Police 2012" states, "the internet has become established as an 
essential social infrastructure for citizens' daily lives and socioeconomic activities", and the Ministry of 
Defense "Defense of Japan 2012" states, "For the military, information communications serve as an 
infrastructure for command and control from the central command to detached units, and the IT revolution 
has resulted in and even greater level of reliance on information communications networks by the military." 
2 Machine to Machine. Systems where devices connected via a network reciprocally exchange information 
without the intervention of a human user and automatically execute the optimal controls. For example, a 
variety of sensor devices (home information appliances, automobiles, vending machines, buildings, 
smartphones, etc.) cooperate via a network to realize provision of energy management, facility management, 
deterioration monitoring, disaster prevention, welfare and a variety of other services in various fields.  
3  For example, the Information-technology Promotion Agency (Hereinafter "IPA"), independent 
administrative institution, "Information Security White Paper 2012" states, "System environments have also 
changed greatly in the past few years. New devices have emerged, and there have also been changes in 
service structure such as the opening of control systems and systems like cloud computing."  

 
6 
 
Cyberspace is essential to strengthen Japan's growth potential, and a greater 
level of expansion and penetration is expected in the future. For example, ITS4 
and smart grids which utilize open data and big data are necessary in order to 
realize the supply and demand of clean and economic energy as well as safe, 
convenient and economic next generation infrastructure which are vital for 
strengthening growth potential. The information systems, information 
communications networks and similar systems of which these are composed, 
will bring about even greater expansion and penetration of cyberspace. 
In addition, cyberspace is expected to expand and penetrate even more on a 
global scale, and is receiving attention worldwide as a force for inducing 
national growth as indispensable for promoting economic growth and innovation, 
resolving social issues and other for other purposes.5 
 
② “Increasingly serious risks” surrounding cyberspace 
Cyberspace has a high degree of anonymity, with little traceable evidence, 
suffers from very little geographical or temporal limitations, and is capable of 
affecting large numbers of unspecified individuals within a short period of time.  
For these reasons, the threat of so-called "cyber attacks" has continued to 
grow, including unauthorized intrusions via cyberspace, theft, alteration and 
destruction of information, information system outages and incorrect operations, 
malicious program execution and DDoS attacks,6 through abuse of information 
communications networks, information systems and similar systems. 
Among early cyber attacks, many of the threats were crimes for pleasure for 
the purpose of showing off, making an example, harassment and similar 
reasons.7 However, attacks for financial and threat purpose soon began to 
                                                  
4 Intelligent Transport Systems. Systems aimed at improving road user convenience, eliminating traffic 
accidents and traffic congestion, optimizing transport network management and other purposes by 
networking individuals, vehicles and roads. Navigation systems and automatic toll collection systems have 
already become commonplace. In the future the practical application of safe driving, automated driving and 
other systems through vehicle-vehicle and vehicle-road communications is expected.  
5 For example, the G8 Summit of Deauville “G8 Declaration Renewed Commitment for Freedom and 
Democracy” (May, 2011) states, "All over the world, the Internet has become essential to our societies, 
economies and their growth. (abridged) The Internet has become a major driver for the global economy, its 
growth and innovation."  
6 Distributed Denial of Services attacks. 
7 For example, the "love letter" worm, which was spread through email infections and destroyed data on 

 
7 
 
appear8, and recently attacks aimed at stealing national and business secrets9 
and aimed at destroying critical data and systems10 have begun to appear. 
Further, overseas, cyber attacks have been indicated which have been said to be 
linked with military operations, and it is said that a large number of foreign 
militaries are developing their offensive capabilities on cyberspace, and that 
intrusions have been made into the information communications networks and 
systems of other countries in order to gather information. 
The techniques for cyber attacks are also becoming increasingly more 
complex and sophisticated. For example, in addition to website falsification and 
DDoS attacks aimed at stopping online services,11 such attacks have also started 
to appear as drive-by download attacks using web-based infection viruses,12 
attacks on closed controlled networks which do not connect to the internet or 
other external networks carried out using USB memory or other means,13 MITB 
attacks where malware hijacks a web browser and alters communications,14 and 
targeted attacks consisting of a combination of facets including zero-day 
exploits and social engineering like so-called "Yari-tori type."15 These attacks 
include some for which it has been pointed out that the advanced technical level 
and planning likely required the contributions of a government. 
In addition, the scope of targets for cyber attacks has also grown from private 
                                                                                                                                                            
PCs in the first half of the 2000's.   
8  For example, statements from so-called "hacktivists" criticizing the Copyright act when illegal 
downloads were criminalized around June of 2012, and a variety of damages occurred including website 
defacement and DoS attacks on government facilities, political parties and related organizations. 
9 For example, the discovery of virus infections resulting from targeted attacks on the Diet, government 
institutions, defense related businesses, etc. since September of 2011.  
10 For example, the "Shamoon" virus cyber attacks which rendered computers incapable of booting by 
using a technique of altering the master boot record (MBR) of infected computers overseas.  
11 For example, the website defacement and DDoS attacks against government institutions and other 
targets which occurred in around September of 2012.  
12 For example, "Gumblar" and other attacks which struck ferociously from 2009 to 2010, aimed at web 
browser and OS vulnerabilities, downloading unauthorized programs such as viruses to PCs without the 
user's intent when browsing websites.  
13 For example, in addition to "Stuxnet," which was used for cyber attacks against uranium enrichment 
facilities via the internet, infection was also possible through USB memory stick connected to infected 
computers, making intrusions possible even into stand-alone systems isolated from the internet.  
14 Man In The Browser attack. Attacks where malware infecting a user's PC hijacks a web browser and 
takes advantage of a normal session to embed unauthorized operations. For example, unauthorized 
operations where when a user carries out a normal operation in online banking, the recipient of transferred 
money is changed behind the scenes.  
15 Ways to send targeted attack emails after pretending natural situations not by sending targeted attack 
email from the beginning, but by several exchanges of regular emails disguised as an association with 
business. See, the National Police Agency “Cyber attacks situation in 2012 year” (February 28, 2013) 

 
8 
 
spaces such as individuals and households to public spaces such as social 
infrastructure. Information communications equipment is being distributed to a 
variety of people, things and places through situations such as ownership of 
more than one device by individuals, the rapid increase in the number of 
individuals who bring smart devices such as smartphones, the propagation of 
information appliances which can be remotely operated from outside the home, 
BYOD16 and use of copy machines and other multi-functional products in the 
workplace, installation of POS terminals and security cameras in shops and 
utilization of sensors and other equipment in social infrastructure and similar 
settings.    
In Japan, up until now, in addition to risks of destruction of equipment due to 
natural disasters and accidents, and leaks of information and incorrect operations 
of systems by authorized users, measures have been implemented for dealing 
with cybercrimes and cyber attacks. However, risks related to cyber attacks have 
reached a level greatly exceeding previous expectations due to changes in 
purposes, techniques and other aspects. In particular, risks have continued to 
become remarkably more "severe", "widespread" and "globalized" and we are 
facing a new situation of "increasingly serious risks", which affects not only 
national security and crisis management but also greatly affects international 
competitiveness and present a fear of instilling a severe sense of anxiety and 
insecurity in people.  
 
[More severe risks] 
Risks which are a threat to national security as well as the lives, bodies, 
properties and other interests of people have appeared. The actualization of 
threats of targeted attacks thought to be aimed at the theft of technological and 
confidential information from Japanese government institutions, the defense 
industry, critical infrastructure providers, research institutions and other entities 
have also been indicated.17  
                                                  
16 Bring Your Own Device. A situation where, in a business or other setting, employees access company 
information systems by their own private smartphones or other information devices, using their personal 
information devices to view, edit and otherwise manipulate the required information for work. 
17 For example, in addition to footnote 9, cases where TPP related information may have been leaked from 
government institutions, cases where issues arose related to the possible theft of technical information, etc. 

 
9 
 
In these types of incidents, there were cases where the victim was not even 
aware of the attack and damages, such as cases where at the point they were 
discovered, the information had already been stolen years earlier.18 Further, it 
can also be assumed that even in some cases where damages from cyber attacks 
were recognized, they were not disclosed in order to prevent even further 
damages arising and effects on reputation and stock prices. That is to say, the 
cases that are currently clearly known about are only the tip of the iceberg, and it 
is possible that critical information related to the maintenance of the nation and 
businesses is even now still being thieved.  
Overseas, cyber attacks aimed at traffic message display signal devices19 and 
cyber attacks aimed at systems in critical infrastructures like control systems, 
with a degree of complexity and sophistication that raises suspicions about the 
involvement of government level organizations, have occurred and the risk of 
such attacks causing widespread and far-reaching social turmoil has become a 
real issue.   
In the future, it can be expected that the propagation of SDN20 in 
telecommunications infrastructure, ITS in transportation infrastructure and smart 
grids in power infrastructure will result in a variety of social infrastructure being 
always connected to networks, and managed and controlled by software. It can 
thus be hypothesized that there is potential for cyber attacks targeting 
vulnerabilities in the software of these systems to directly result in obstruction of 
communications, transportation disorder, blackouts and other large scale social 
turmoil and possibly even deaths.21 
                                                                                                                                                            
from critical infrastructure providers, and cases where problems arose from the possible theft information 
related to space station specifications, etc. from independent administrative agencies carrying out 
aeronautical research and development. 
18 For example, cases where the PCs used by employees at government institutions were infected by viruses 
for several years resulting in leaked information. 
19 For example, in January of 2009, cyber attacks on system vulnerabilities changed the messages on signal 
devices in several US states to read "Zombies Ahead." 
20 Software Defined Networking. A technique for using software to create a virtual network. Allows for 
creation of a separate virtual network on top of a physically connected network. 
21 There has been a trend of increasing numbers of incidents each year with SCADA (Supervisory Control 
And Data Acquisition) which carry out system monitoring and control via computers and other types of 
industrial control systems, with reports of information security incidents resulting in damages both in Japan 
and overseas. The IPA "Report on Critical Infrastructure Control System Security and IT Service 
Continuance" (March, 2009), the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry "Cyber Security and Economy 
Research Committee Interim Report" (August 5, 2011). 

 
10 
 
 
[More widespread risks] 
While the risks surrounding cyberspace become more severe, the risks are 
also rapidly becoming more widespread. The rapid propagation of smartphones 
and other devices among people,22, expansion of M2M/sensor networks, the 
advent of conditions where everything is connected to the internet (Internet of 
Things) and other situations, have increased the spread of the risks by 
introducing conditions where the devices which can be targeted by cyber attacks 
are present in every possible place and situation around us.  
Smart devices, with advanced processing functions such as smartphones, 
which are always turned on and connected to the internet while carried around 
by users, have rapidly propagated among general users. Because these devices, 
can use public wireless LAN and have because OS structural restrictions limit 
the effectiveness of security software, there have been cases23 where users' 
positional information, address book information, conversational information 
and other information have been transmitted to external recipients via malicious 
applications. Offices are also faced with the same threats due to the increasing 
propagation of BYOD such as smartphones and other devices.  
In addition, the propagation of M2M/sensor networks has spread the risks to 
home electronics, automobiles, multi-functional products such as copy machines, 
security cameras and variety of other equipment. Devices which had not 
formerly been intended to be connected to a network now connect to the internet 
and carry out control and other functions through exchange of information 
without any human intermediaries, presenting risks that cyber attacks against 
these devices could cause unexpected and unanticipated operations.  
For example, there were cases where DDoS attacks against foreign 
                                                  
22 Household penetration rate of smartphones is a 20 points over the previous year, a nearly 30% rapid 
propagation. Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications "Communications Usage Trend Survey in 
2011" (May 30, 2012. Hereinafter "Communications Usage Trend Survey.") 
23 For smartphones, malware has been verified which makes illicit fee collections, captures administrator 
privileges, makes telephone calls without user input, steals data or eavesdrops on communications via 
remote operation, transmits the personal information stored in user’s contacts to external recipients, notifies 
third parties of location information without consent, etc. Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications: 
“Smartphone/Cloud Security Research Committee Final Report” (June 29, 2012). 

 
11 
 
government institutions, etc.,24 used a security camera installed in a convenience 
store in Japan as a springboard. It has also been pointed out that there are risks 
of life related information and positional information including places visited 
being leaked through cyber attacks targeting home electronics and automobiles 
connected to the internet, and risks of business related and other information 
being leaked through use of copiers and other multi-functional devices being 
used as a hub for information theft in offices.25 
Moreover, it is not only information systems connected to the internet, but 
also information networks and other closed, independent systems isolated from 
external networks such as information networks, which are subject to cyber 
attacks. For example, the infection with malware of control systems in critical 
infrastructure through USB memory sticks, resulting in inoperable infrastructure 
equipment, has become a real issue.26 
It is not just the above scope of attacks that has broadened, but also the scope 
of who can carry out attacks in cyberspace. There are tools available which 
allow even individuals without significant capital or knowledge to easily carry 
out advanced cyber attacks, creating an environment where even non-specialists 
can carry out cyber attacks.   
 
[More globalized risks] 
The risks surrounding cyberspace are becoming borderless. One third of the 
world's population is internet users,27 and the internet continues to propagate in 
both newly emerging nations as well as developing countries. In Japan, a greater 
level of handling is required for these borderless, globalized risks as many 
activities in real-space come to depend upon cyberspace.  
For example, in Japan, in DDoS attacks against foreign government 
institutions overseas, cases have been found that personal owned home PCs 
                                                  
24 The DDoS attacks against 40 government institutions and other webservers targets which occurred in 
South Korea in March of 2011. 
25 IPA “Report on Digital Multi-functional Devices in FY2012” (March 12, 2013) 
26 IPA "Report on 'New Types of Attacks'" (December 17, 2010) 
27 As of 2011, the worldwide number of the internet users was 2.265 billion individuals, 32.5% of the 
global population. The ITU Statistics “Individuals using the Internet per 100 inhabitants, 2001-2011,” & 
“Global numbers of individuals using the Internet, total and per 100 inhabitants, 2001-2011.” 

 
12 
 
were used as the springboards for attacks, using the PCs as servers to direct the 
attacks.28 In another large-scale overseas case, at the same time as the attacks 
occurred, the unauthorized programs used in the attacks were also found in 
Japan.29 In addition, there were also cases where advanced anonymization 
techniques using multiple nodes and other devices overseas, resulted in the 
spoofed PC owners being erroneously arrested.30 
Overseas, issues have arisen where there is suspicion of the involvement of 
national governments in targeted attacks aimed at stealing secret information 
such as trade secrets.31 It is not unthinkable that cyber attacks against Japan 
involving the participation of foreign governments could occur in the future. In 
addition, there are also fears of attacks on one point in a global supply chain 
affecting other points.  
Means to commit cyber attacks can be easily obtained, and in addition to a 
wide variety of actors, not just nations, carrying out concealment, impersonation 
and other acts, these attacks can be effected from anywhere in the world. If 
cyber attacks can be carried out directly to Japan, then they can also be carried 
out in cyberspaces related to other countries and can be carried out using 
cyberspaces affiliated with Japan as a springboard for attacks elsewhere. There 
is still no accepted international common opinion on the relationship between 
cyber attacks and armed attacks, however the possibility of cyber attacks 
corresponding to armed attacks being carried out in this way is undeniable.  
 
 
                                                  
28 In the DDoS attacks against 40 webservers at government institutions, etc. which occurred in South 
Korea in March of 2011, the household PCs of general users were utilized as springboards for the attack. 
The National Police Agency “Response to the Cyber Attacks against the South Korean Government 
Institutions and others in March” (September 22, 2011) 
29 According to the IPA "Computer Virus/Unauthorized Access Report Conditions and Consultation 
Reception Conditions [1st Quarter 2013 (January – March)] (April 16, 2013)", "Reports on the unauthorized 
program Trojan/MBRKill (Report name: Trojan.Jokra [2 reports/detections known cases 3]) used in the 
large-scale cyber attacks against South Korea were received in March 2013. If infected by this unauthorized 
program, it is possible the hard drive contents will be erased. It is estimated that the same unauthorized 
program was at least present in Japan at the same time as the occurrence of the damages in South Korea." 
30 Case where general users were impersonated by remote controlling the PCs of general users infected 
with the "iesys.exe" remote control virus, and their identities used to post massive amounts of death threads 
on internet bulletin boards and other systems. The advanced anonymizing technique Tor (The Onion 
Router) was maliciously used in this case. 
31 For example, “the Administration Strategy on Mitigating the Theft of U.S. Trade Secrets” (White House, 
Feb. 2013) and “the Annual Report to Congress” (Department of Defense, May 2013). 

 
13 
 
In Japan, the National Information Security Center (Hereinafter abbreviated 
as "NISC")32 has been established in April 2005 within the Cabinet Secretariat 
as the command post for information security policy, to carry out the planning, 
proposal and general coordination related to planning of basic strategy and other 
centralized/cross-cutting promotion of information security measures for the 
public and private sectors. In addition, the Information Security Policy Council 
(hereinafter abbreviated as the "ISCP")33 has been established in the Strategic 
Headquarters 
for 
the 
Promotion 
of 
an 
Advanced 
Information 
and 
Telecommunications Network Society  in May of the same year for 
centralized/cross-cutting promotion of information security measures for the 
public and private sectors, and works towards improving the level of 
information security and strengthening ability to deal with cyber attacks for 
government institutions and critical infrastructure providers. 
In the ISPC, the strategies were determined over the 3 stages comprehensive 
mid to long term plan, starting with the First National Strategy on Information 
Security (Hereinafter abbreviated as the "First Strategy").34 
In the First Strategy, information security is positioned as a national goal 
consisting of sustainable economic development through the use and application 
of information communications technologies and the guarantee of safety against 
threats which arise from such, and promoted the shift from reacting to actualized 
issues to measures for preventative handling of issues from a viewpoint of 
forging a solid footing to deal with information security issues. In addition, the 
plan established a framework for various actors, including government 
institutions, critical infrastructure providers and business operators, where rather 
than each actor carrying out their own handling of issues in a vertically divided 
structure, each actor would maintain awareness of their own responsibilities and 
appropriately divide roles in accordance with the positions, situations and 
capacities of each actor. 
                                                  
32 In accordance with Article 12 of the Cabinet Secretariat Organization Ordinance (1957 Government 
Ordinance No. 219) "Statute on the Establishment of the National Information Security Center" (Prime 
Minister, February 29, 2000). 
33 "On the Establishment of the Information Security Policy Council" (May 30, 2005 The Chair of the 
Strategic Headquarters for the Promotion of an Advanced Information and Telecommunications Network 
Society) in accordance with Article 4 of The Strategic Headquarters for the Promotion of an Advanced 
Information and Telecommunications Network Society (2000 Government Ordinance No. 555). 
34 February 2, 2006 Information Security Policy Council 

 
14 
 
The Second National Strategy on Information Security (Hereinafter 
abbreviated as the "Second Strategy"),35 the existing preventative measures were 
steadily promoted while strengthening after the event handling capacities in an 
"accident assumed society" where promotion of rapid response and measures in 
the event of an emergency, would ensure business continuity. 
While continuing to maintain these measures, the "Information Security 
Strategy for Protecting the Nation" (Hereinafter abbreviated as the "Strategy for 
Protecting the Nation")36 also sets as objectives, from security and crisis 
management viewpoints, the achievement of capabilities, at the highest standard 
in the world, to respond to all cyberspace threats, and promotes the handling of 
environmental changes, such as the occurrence of large-scale cyber attacks 
overseas, the preparation of a system for managing such situations, and the 
construction and strengthening of a system for regular collection and sharing of 
information. 
It can thus be said that, since the establishment of information security policy 
through the First Strategy, the construction of a use an application environment 
for information communications technologies to promote sustainable economic 
development and resolve social issues, strengthening of measures from security 
and crisis management viewpoints and implementation of "accident assumed 
society" measures, appropriate handling of new environmental changes, and 
measures based on each of these strategies, have been, in general, realized.37  
However, cyberspace continues to rapidly expand and penetrate, and the risks 
surrounding cyberspace continue to increase seriously, becoming more severe, 
more widespread and more globalized, and as such, an entirely new level of 
measures is becoming necessary.  
 
In international bodies such as international conferences, the United Nations, 
                                                  
35 February 3, 2009 Information Security Policy Council 
36 May 11, 2010 Information Security Policy Council 
37 For example, “Evaluation for Information Security Policy in FY2011” (July 4, 2012 NISC), 
“Evaluation for Information Security Policy in FY2010” (July 8, 2011 NISC) & “Evaluation for 
Information Security Policy in FY2009” (July 22, 2010). 

 
15 
 
regional organizations, and other organizations where a wide variety of public 
and private actors participate,38 active debate is being held on codes of conduct 
for cyberspace, application of international laws and internet governance for acts 
using cyberspace and other aspects of functions, roles and circumstances of 
cyberspace.  
Other countries are also establishing national strategies on "cybersecurity"39 
in order to deal with the risks surrounding cyberspace from such viewpoints as 
national security and economic growth. The functions, roles and circumstances 
of cyberspace have quickly become a common international issue, and as such it 
is necessary to tackle this issue from a global point of view.  
 
[United States] 
In the United States, cybersecurity has been considered one of the most 
serious economic and national security issues facing the country,40 and threats 
related to cybersecurity are treated as the most serious challenges for national 
security, public safety and economic development in the country's "National 
Security Strategy."41 Based on this, the country established strategies for each 
individual field in 2011.  
For example, the country has established the "International Strategy for 
Cyberspace,"42 which presents a future vision of international development for 
                                                  
38 For example, APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) Ministerial Meeting on Telecommunications 
and Information Industry (October 2010, Okinawa), OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development) High Level Meeting on the Internet Economy (June 2011, Paris), APT (Asia Pacific 
Telecommunity) Cybersecurity Forum (December 2011, Tokyo), International Conference on Cyberspace 
(November 2011, London; October 2012, Budapest), ITU (International Telecommunications Union) World 
Conferences on International Telecommunications (WCIT. December 2012, Dubai), NATO (North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization) CCD COE（Cooperative Cyber Defense Center Of Excellence）and The First 
Committee of the UN General Assembly (in charge of international security affairs and disarmament) " 
Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security" 
government specialist group (2012-). 
39 At present there is no common definition of "cybersecurity" shared among various nations. For example, 
the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) "National Cyber Security Strategies - 
Practical Guide on Development and Execution" (December 2012) states, "There is no uniform definition 
of 'cyber security' at the EU or international levels". 
40 The Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (White House, Jan. 2008), The Cyberspace Policy 
Review (White House, 2009). 
41 National Security Strategy (White House, May 2010). 
42 International Strategy for Cyberspace (White House, May 2011). Activity regions for policies indicated 
as priority policies requiring domestic and international as well as private and public sector cooperation 
include (1) economics, (2) protecting our networks, (3) law enforcement, (4) military, (5) internet 

 
16 
 
cyberspace which supports international trade, strengthens international security, 
promotes freedom of expression and innovation, is open and interoperable, as 
well as secure and reliable; the strategy for protecting economic and social 
values without impeding innovation in the internet business field;43 the 
"Department of Defense Strategy for Operating in Cyberspace"44 which adds 
cyberspace to the preexisting land, sea, air and outer space regions; and  "The 
Cybersecurity Strategy for the Homeland Security Enterprise",45 which aims for 
a cyberspace which supports secure and resilient infrastructure, brings about 
innovation and prosperity and protects citizen's freedoms such as privacy from 
the initial design stages, and also plans for the establishment of protections for 
critical information infrastructure and cyber-ecosystems. 
 
[EU] 
In the EU, in addition to natural disasters, terrorism and other situations, new 
transnational threats of economic espionage or state-sponsored cyber attacks 
have led to an awareness of the growing frequency and scale of cybersecurity 
                                                                                                                                                            
governance, (6) international development, (7) internet freedom. 
43 Cybersecurity, Innovation and the Internet Economy (The Department of Commerce Internet Policy Task 
Force, June 2011). Proposals have been made for the following as candidates for "internet/information 
innovation fields" for small and medium-sized enterprises providing online services and large businesses 
only operating on the internet, etc. which are not classified as critical information infrastructure: (1) 
creation of governmental approaches for minimizing vulnerabilities through creation of guidelines, etc., (2) 
creation of incentives for incident reporting, information sharing, etc., (3) education, research and 
development, (4) international cooperation including international standardization and sharing of best 
practices. 
44 Department of Defense Strategy for Operating in Cyberspace (July 2011). The following were indicated 
as initiatives, (1) Treat cyberspace as an operational domain to organize, train, and equip so that DoD can 
take full advantage of cyberspace’s potential, (2) Employ new defense operating concepts to protect DoD 
networks and systems, (3) Partner with other U.S. government departments and agencies and the private 
sector to enable a whole-of-government cybersecurity strategy, (4) Build robust relationships with U.S. 
allies and international partners to strengthen collective cybersecurity, (5) Leverage the nation’s ingenuity 
through an exceptional cyber workforce and rapid technological innovation. 
45 Blueprint for a Secure Cyber Future - The Cybersecurity Strategy for the Homeland Security Enterprise 
(Department of Homeland Security, Nov. 2011). The purposes of the strategy for protecting critical 
information infrastructure are (1) identify and harden critical information infrastructure, avert risk through 
technical innovation, etc., (2) ensure priority response and recovery by preparing for contingencies, (3) 
maintain shared situational awareness through information analysis, sharing and specialized cybersecurity 
training, (4) increase resilience to system failures, and for strengthening the cyber ecosystem are (1) 
improve literacy through public and private sector personnel training and outreach and awareness raising, 
(2) reduce vulnerabilities, improve product trust by improving usability, (3) improve interoperability 
between devices, build collaborative systems through security process automation, etc., (4) widely share 
information on security hazards, analogous to how information about wellness and disease is reported by 
public health officials, share information on certified equipment, etc., maintain transparency through 
incentives and other means. 

 
17 
 
incidents and the potential they have for inflicting major damage on national 
safety and economy including interrupting supply in critical services such as 
healthcare, power supply and automobiles, leading to the establishment of the 
"Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union,"46 which presents a 
comprehensive future vision related to cyber attack prevention and response, in 
February of 2013. 
This strategy states that in order for cyberspace to remain open and free, the 
fundamental principles and values of fundamental human rights, democracy and 
rule of law should be applied in the same manner as offline, while the 
government should play a critical role in providing protection from incidents 
and malicious activities. 
 
[UK] 
In the UK, "The National Security Strategy"47 was established in 2010 to 
promote growth via the internet while recognizing that as critical data and 
systems become more dependent on cyberspace, these circumstances bring with 
them new risks consisting of difficulties in detection and defense, and based on 
this recognition, positions cyber attacks as a threat of the highest priority.   
In 2011, in order to respond to the threat of cyber attacks, the country 
established "The UK Cyber Security Strategy"48 which presents a future vision 
enhancing prosperity, national security and a strong society under core values of 
liberty, fairness, transparency and the rule of law, and which draws considerable 
                                                  
46 Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace (European 
Commission & High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Feb. 7, 2013). (1) 
Achieving cyber resilience, (2) Drastically reducing cybercrime, (3) Developing cyberdefence policy and 
capabilities related to the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), (4) Develop 
industrial and technological resources for cybersecurity, (5) Establish a coherent international cyberspace 
policy for the European Union and promote EU core values, are given as priority items. 
47 A Strong Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The National Security Strategy (Cabinet Office, Oct. 2010). 
48 The UK Cyber Security Strategy Protecting and Promoting the UK in a Digital World (Cabinet Office, 
Nov. 2011). States (1) Tackling cybercrime and making the UK one of the most secure places in the world 
to do business, (2) Making the UK more resilient to cyber attacks and better able to protect our interests in 
cyberspace through strengthening defences in cyberspace and improving ability to detect threats in 
cyberspace, (3) Helping to shape an open, vibrant and stable cyberspace which the UK public can use 
safely and that supports open societies through promoting an open and interoperable cyberspace, (4) 
Building the UK’s cross-cutting knowledge, skills and capability to underpin all cyber security objectives 
through building a coherent cross-sector research agenda, deepening understanding of the threats, 
vulnerabilities and risks, and increasing ability to respond to incidents, as objectives. 

 
18 
 
economic and social value from a vibrant, resilient and secure cyberspace.  
 
[France] 
In France, "The French White Paper on Defense and National Security,"49 a 
strategy on national security presented in 2008, treats cybersecurity as a new 
vulnerability and a key theme.  
In 2011, based on this national security strategy, the "Information Systems 
Defense and Security Strategy"50 was established for the purposes of making 
France a powerful global cyber defense nation, protecting the nation's decision 
making capabilities by protecting information related to state sovereignty, 
strengthening the cybersecurity of the nation's critical infrastructure and assuring 
information security in cyberspace.  
 
[Germany] 
In Germany, "The Cyber Security Strategy for Germany"51 was established in 
February of 2011 to maintain and promote economic and social prosperity based 
on an understanding that the availability of cyberspace and the integrity, 
confidentiality and other factors of data within that cyberspace are among the 
most critical of issues for the 21st century and that the maintenance of 
cybersecurity is, both domestically and internationally, a common issue that 
                                                  
49 The French White Paper on Defense and National Security (Conseil d'État, 2008). 
50 Information systems defense and security - France’s strategy (ANSSI, Feb. 2011). Identifies (1) 
Effectively anticipate and analyse the environment in order to make appropriate decisions, (2) Detect and 
block attacks, alert and support potential victims, (3) Enhance and perpetuate our scientific, technical, 
industrial and human capabilities in order to maintain our independence, (4) Protect the information 
systems of the State and the operators of critical infrastructures to ensure better national resilience, (5) 
Adapt French legislation to incorporate technological developments and new practices, (6) Develop 
international collaboration initiatives in the areas of information systems security, cyberdefence and fight 
against cybercrime in order to better protect national information systems, (7) Communicate, inform and 
convince to increase the understanding by the French population of the extent of the challenges related to 
information systems security, as areas of action. 
51 The Cyber Security Strategy for Germany (Federal Ministry of the Interior, Feb. 2011). Identifies (1) 
Protection of critical information infrastructures, (2) Secure IT systems in Germany, (3) Strengthening IT 
security in the public administration, (4) National Cyber Response Centre, (5) National Cyber Security 
Council, (6) Effective crime control also in cyberspace, (7) Effective coordinated action to ensure cyber 
security in Europe and worldwide, (8) Use of reliable and trustworthy information technology, (9) 
Personnel development in federal authorities, (10) Tools to respond to cyber attacks as strategic objectives 
and measures. 

 
19 
 
should be jointly handled by the nation, businesses and society. 
 
[Korea] 
In Korea, the "National Cyber Security Masterplan"52 was established in 
August of 2011 in order to protect cyberspace by attempting to clarify the roles 
of relevant government institutions and preparing a system for handling cyber 
threats of a national level, which are becoming ever more intelligent and 
advanced, based on a recognition that cyber attacks have become a threat to both 
the people's properties and national security. 
 
As cyberspace is connected globally, it has become critical to secure the  
sustainability and expansivity of cyberspace aimed at both handling the 
increasing serious risks surrounding cyberspace and keeping pace with the 
continued merger and integration with real-space for the national security and 
crisis management, socioeconomic development, and to assure the safety and 
security of the people.  
For these reasons, Japan aims to construct a "world-leading," "resilient" and 
"vigorous" cyberspace, and incorporate this cyberspace as a social system to 
realize a "cybersecurity nation" as a society that is strong against cyber attacks, 
full of innovations and of which its people will be proud.  
 
                                                  
52 National Cyber Security Masterplan – Protecting national cyber space from cyber attacks (National 
Cyber Security Center, Aug. 2011). Identifies (1) Establishing cyber threat early detection and response  
system, (2) Improving the level of security for critical information and facilities, (3) Developing platform 
that would enable a stronger cyber security, (4) Establishing deterrence against cyber provocation and 
strengthening international cooperation, (5) Elevating the level of security management of critical 
information and facilities, as major imperatives. 

 
20 
 
The basic principles for realizing a cybersecurity nation in Japan are as 
follows. 
 
① Ensuring free flow of information 
Japan has worked towards constructing a safe and reliable cyberspace in 
which free flow of information is ensured by ensuring openness and 
interoperability of cyberspace without excessively administering or regulating it.   
As a result, cyberspace has provided us a variety of positive benefits 
including innovation, economic growth and solutions for social issues while still 
ensuring freedom of expression and protection of privacy.  
This strategy also bases its basic principles on this ensuring free flow of 
information, and is imperative to counter the increasing serious risks 
surrounding cyberspace.  
 
② Responding to increasingly serious risks 
The risks surrounding cyberspace continue to increasingly become serious 
and immediate response has become necessary. In particular, the existing 
measures and initiatives that have been implemented in the previous strategies 
up until now are no longer capable of responding to these more severe, 
widespread and globalized risks.  
If cyberspace is vulnerable to cyber attacks and other threats, it will not only 
prove difficult to ensure free flow of information, but it can also be assumed that 
it will make it impossible to maintain people's confidence in cyberspace.   
For these reasons, in addition to the individual handling measures up until 
now, consisting of advance and after the event measures and preparation of 
response systems, a new mechanism through multi-layered efforts is necessary 
as a social system that can promptly and appropriately address the changing 
risks associated with the revolution in information communications technologies 
and other factors.  

 
21 
 
 
③ Enhancing of risk-based approach 
Up until now Japan has pursued a policy of having each individual actor, 
including government institutions, critical infrastructure providers, businesses 
and individuals, exert the maximum efforts to each handle their own information 
security for the purpose53 of elevating the capabilities to deal with all threats 
surrounding cyberspace to highest level in the world.  
However, as the critical information and information systems which need to 
be protected become more and more dependent on cyberspace, the threat posed 
by cyber attacks is also increasing as techniques become more complex and 
sophisticated. In these conditions, it is necessary to continue the measures being 
carried out by each individual actor, while also dynamically implementing 
handling with appropriate and timely allocation of resources as a social 
mechanism for responding to ever-changing risks.54 
Such actions as improving the recognition and analysis functions for incidents 
related to cyber attacks, integrating these functions, advancing threat analysis 
capabilities by promoting information sharing, strengthening of cooperation 
between CSIRT55 for each actor and between international CSIRT56 are all 
critical, and it is necessary to strengthen risk-based approach based on the 
characteristics of the risks through dynamically responding capabilities brought 
about by these actions.  
 
④ Acting in partnership based on shared responsibilities 
                                                  
53 “The Strategy for Protecting the Nation” states "Concretely, Japan must improve its ability to respond to 
all types of ICT threats, including cyber attacks, to the world’s highest level" as one of its “Targets to 
Achieve”. 
54 For example, carrying out quick and well-informed "dynamic defense process collaboration" (OODA 
loop) through repetition of a pattern of Observe, Orient, Decide, and Act. Refer to the "Proposal for 
Promotion of Information Security Policy in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications" (April 5, 
2013 Information Security Advisory Board). 
55 Computer Security Incident Response Team. A system at businesses and government organizations for 
monitoring to check if any security issues exist with information systems and for carrying out 
investigations including cause analysis and extent of impact in the event an incident occurs. 
56 JPCERT Coordination Center (Japan Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center, 
hereinafter abbreviated as "JPCERT/CC") works to further cooperation between both domestic and 
international CSIRT and carries out incident response. 

 
22 
 
Diverse entities such as the government, public, academic, industrial and 
private sectors in Japan have enjoyed the benefit of the expanding cyberspace on 
which every activity in real-space is dependent.  
Accordingly, as the risks surrounding cyberspace have become increasingly 
serious, it becomes necessary for each entity to carry out their own information 
security measures in an independent and proactive fashion as part of their social 
responsibilities to realize a world-leading, resilient and vigorous cyberspace.  
Especially, as risks become more widespread, the extent of damages can 
spread far and wide through cyberspace, and in addition to measures by each 
individual actor, it is important that the whole of society participated in the 
"cyberspace hygiene" as a preventative information security measure against   
unauthorized intrusions, malware infections, vulnerabilities as factors for these 
incidents and other risks.  
In this regard, the multi-stakeholders in cyberspace need to fulfill each 
responsibilities corresponding to their respective roles in the society while 
mutually cooperating and assisting with each other including international 
cooperation and cooperation between the public and private sectors. 
 
In the previous strategies, each actor would maintain awareness of their own 
responsibilities and appropriately divide roles in accordance with their positions, 
situations and capacities. Specifically, information security measures were 
promoted by indicating the roles and methods57 expected of the "Measure 
Implementation Entities," who actually applied and implemented the 
information security measures for their own, and the "Entities to Promote 
Understanding and Solutions to Issues," who provided support for the measures 
                                                  
57 From the First Strategy onward, as a "New Public-Private Partnership Model", a framework was 
constructed consisting of "Measure Implementation Entities", which in turn consist of (1) "Central 
Government/Local Governments", (2) "Critical Infrastructures", (3) "Businesses" and (4) Individuals", and 
"Entities to Promote Understanding and Solutions to Issues", in turn consisting of (1) "Central 
Government/Local Governments" as Policy Implementing Entities, (2) "Educational Institutions/Research 
Institutions" including elementary and secondary schools, higher education institutions, research and 
development institutions and technological research institutions, (3) "Information-Related Businesses" 
which provide information system construction, communications services and other IT foundation 
construction and provision, and (4) "Media." 

 
23 
 
in technical and environmental arrangement aspects and promoted issue 
understanding and resolution.  
In addition to the actors above, from the Second Strategy onward, measures 
were promoted which also focused on "Entities to Entrust Information," who 
entrust their own information etc., and "Entities to Maintain Information," who 
were entrusted with said information etc., seeking to break individual and 
society away from the pursuit of absolution for the information security,58 for the 
establishment of strong “individual” and “society” to spontaneously think issues.   
Based on the new situation of the advanced merger and integration of 
cyberspace and real-space and the increasing serious risks surrounding 
cyberspace, this strategy seeks to break away from the previous framework 
based on a premise of each actor existing in a vertically divided structure, and 
instead indicates the roles of each stakeholder based on a view that each actor 
dependent on cyberspace is both a measure implementer and at the same time 
also an entity to promote understanding and solutions to issues. 
It is thus imperative to strengthen the dynamic response capabilities of society 
as a whole by having the wide variety of actors who depend on cyberspace to 
each continue to perform their own roles while also mutually cooperating and 
providing mutual aid.  
 
① Roles of government 
The government must strengthen the basic functions of the nation related to 
cyberspace. Specifically, it is necessary for the nation to implement cyberspace 
crime countermeasures  and "defense of cyberspace" to protect the cyberspace 
related to the nation from cyber attacks involving the participation of foreign 
governments, etc., beginning with cyberspace related diplomacy such as actively 
participating in the formation of relevant international rulemaking.  
In addition, as an actor which operates information systems containing its 
                                                  
58 In the Second Strategy "Entities to Entrust Information" "include both parties that actually provide 
information and parties that may potentially provide information", and "all actors are potential information 
providers". In addition, "Entities to Maintain Information" "essentially refers to the same scope as 
"Measure Implementation Entities." 

 
24 
 
own critical information and implements information security measures closely 
worked with the promotion of e-government, the nation is responsible for 
strengthening of measures for government institutions, closely related 
independent administrative agencies, government affiliated corporations and 
other similar organizations as well as using those measures to provide leadership 
and guidance for the measures of other actors. At the same time, the nation must 
also strengthen and enhance the ability to cope with cyber attacks and work to 
ensure that damages are minimized in the event government institutions and 
others are targeted by cyber attacks. 
Furthermore, in order to ensure that other actors, including government 
institutions themselves, can fulfill their roles to the greatest possible extent, the 
government must work to strengthen the functions of the NISC as a command 
post, promote collaboration among relevant actors including between ministries, 
while also proactively preparing new systems, developing advanced 
technologies, carrying out demonstration project, cultivating high level human 
resources, improving literacy and others. 
 
② Roles of critical infrastructure providers 
Any impairment or disruption of the functions of "critical infrastructure,"59 
which is the basis of people’s social lives and economic activities formed by 
businesses that provide services which are extremely difficult to be substituted 
by others, due to cyber attacks and others, has the potential to cause serious 
damages the lives of people and so on.  
For this reason, presently, Japan requires initiatives for "critical infrastructure 
providers" in the 10 fields of information and communications, finance, aviation, 
railways, electricity, gas, government and administrative services (including 
local public authorities), medical services, water and logistics, in accordance 
with measures in government institutions and others. It is necessary to even 
further strengthen measures at these and other providers in hereafter.  
                                                  
59 Defined as "the basis of people’s social lives and economic activities formed by businesses that provide 
services which are extremely difficult to be substituted by others. If its function is suspended, deteriorated 
or become unavailable, it could have significant impacts on people’s social lives and economic activities." 
in the "The Second Action Plan on Information Security Measures for Critical Infrastructures" (February 3, 
2009 Information Security Policy Counci, amended April 26, 2012). 

 
25 
 
In addition, there are fields which have not been considered critical 
infrastructure within Japan up until now, but for which any impediment or 
disruption of the information systems for the relevant services, etc., has the 
potential to have a major effect on the lives of people and socioeconomic 
activities. Specifically these include smart cities and smart towns, ITS and other 
transportation control systems and other new network type systems, as well as 
the defense industry and energy related industries, etc. which are considered 
critical infrastructures in the United States.60 
Hereafter, the government must, based on the positioning of the information 
systems in these fields which have not been considered critical infrastructure up 
until now, consider the measures for these fields based on the scope of critical 
infrastructure and the characteristics or each field, and if the scope of critical 
infrastructure is revised, ensure that the necessary measures are implemented in 
these systems, etc. which are newly designated as critical infrastructure 
providers.  
 
③ Roles of private companies, educational institutions and research institutions 
Private companies, educational institutions and research institutions possess 
intellectual property related information such as technological information, 
financial information, manufacturing technology information and drawings, as 
well as personal information such as client lists, personnel information and 
educational information, and other critical information.  
There is potential for the socioeconomic development of Japan to be hindered 
in the event that these critical information, which is also the source of Japan's 
international competitiveness, is theft, destroyed, etc. as the result of a cyber 
attacks and others. Consequently, in addition to individual information security 
measures at private companies, educational institutions and research institutions, 
collective measures, such as sharing of information, etc. related to cyber attacks 
through industrial organizations and other hubs, are expected. Furthermore, it is 
                                                  
60 Applicable to 18 fields and defined as "systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the 
United States that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact 
on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those 
matters" in the Critical Infrastructure Protection Act of 2001. 

 
26 
 
expected that measures will be improved by obtaining assessments, audits and 
management standards from third party specialist agencies when each individual 
actor implements information security measures.  
In addition, as the actors serving as the core for technology development and 
human resource cultivation, it is expected that private companies, educational 
institutions 
and 
research 
institutions 
will 
work 
together 
in 
industry-government-academia 
collaboration 
to 
provide 
the 
advanced 
technologies and high level human resources that will constitute a world-leading, 
resilient and vigorous cyberspace in Japan.  
 
④ Roles of individual users, small and medium-sized enterprises 
General users and small and medium-sized enterprises, which make up the 
majority of businesses in Japan61 and serve as the core of the supply chain make 
practical use of new information communications technology services every day 
in order to improve convenience, make operations more efficient and speed up 
service provision and others.  
Fact such as approximately 80% of the total population are internet users62, 
and the internet usage of all businesses is nearly 100%,63 show that the scope of 
requirement for information security measures is extremely wide, however the 
such devices as smartphones and PCs used by general users, etc. are security 
holes and if targeted by cyber attacks, have the potential to inflict damages on 
other stakeholders through cyberspace.  
Up until now, measures for general users have been carried out through 
independent effort. Hereafter, it is important that in addition to the 
understanding that "they are responsible for protecting themselves,"64 general 
                                                  
61 According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications "2009 Economic Census – Basic 
Study," the number of small and medium-sized enterprises (number of companies and sole proprietorships) 
is 4,201,000 businesses, making up 99.7% of all businesses, and the number of small and medium-sized 
enterprises is 1,775,000, making up 99.3% of all companies. 
62 According to the Communications Usage Trend Survey, the number of individuals estimated to have used 
the internet in 2011 was 96,100,000, making up 79.1% of the total population. 
63 According to the Communications Usage Trend Survey, the business internet usage rate at the end of 
2011 was 98.8%. 
64 In the First Strategy, for the roles of individuals as Measure Implementation Entities it is stated "it is 
necessary to cultivate awareness about information security to the same level as a general safety rule like 
'you should not talk to strangers'. Individuals are expected to act with clear recognition of basic principle of 

 
27 
 
users must also make efforts to implement measures based on an awareness of 
"not bothering others."65 As such, it can be expected that among general users, 
there will be continued utilization of the activities of each actor, and that 
fomenting this awareness and improving literacy will lead to autonomous 
implementation of measures.  
In addition, for those small and medium-sized enterprises which are involved 
in the handling of Japan's critical information and systems through such 
relationships as contracts with critical infrastructure providers or businesses with 
leading-edge technology, etc., in addition to each business' individual 
information security measures, measures for sharing information related to cyber 
attacks, etc. are expected.  
 
⑤ Roles of cyberspace-related operators 
The majority of the device manufacturers, internet access providers, network 
operators, software developers and other organizations responsible for the 
equipment, networks, applications, etc. that make up cyberspace, are private 
sector. In addition, the majority of organizations responsible for providing the 
tools for handling risks surrounding cyberspace are also private sector.  
In the strategies up until now, the "information related businesses", which 
actually provide direct tools to each entity for the implementation of information 
security measures, have been responsible for eliminating any vulnerabilities in 
the products and services they provided to the greatest extent possible, in 
addition become positioned increasingly as important actors from a viewpoint of 
providing safer, more reliable products and others to improve international 
competitiveness.66  
                                                                                                                                                            
protecting themselves on their own." 
65 The message of the Director of the Secretariat during the implementation of International Cyber Security 
Campaign of September 28, 2012, states, "Being lax about information security measures does not result in 
damages to just yourself, but also to other people. Use smartphones and computers safely and in peace of 
mind by steadily implementing information security measures." 
66 The First Strategy states, "Information-related businesses are ones that actually provide direct services to 
central government and local governments, critical infrastructures, businesses, and individuals for the 
implementation of measures, and assume a role to help the enhancement of information security 
infrastructure of Japan. Therefore, they need to re-acknowledge that they are responsible for eliminating the 
vulnerability of their products and services as much as possible and make efforts to offer safer and more 
secure products and service. In doing so, the information-related businesses should have a positive 

 
28 
 
However, it is difficult to eliminate all software vulnerabilities in products, 
etc., during the development stage, and it is difficult to handle every aspect of 
the risks diffused through cyberspace, upon which various actors depend, simply 
through measures implemented by each actor, such as general users.  
Accordingly, it is expected that in addition to the "cyberspace-related 
operators", who provide the products, services, technologies, etc. related to 
cyberspace, endeavoring to ensure that no vulnerabilities are created in these 
products, services, technologies, etc. at the time of development, that they will 
also implement measures to maintain the cyberspace hygiene by preventing the 
spread of damages through eliminating vulnerabilities by implementing 
appropriate countermeasures when such vulnerabilities are discovered after 
development and by such measures as recognizing and analyzing incidents 
related to cyber attacks. 
In addition, at present there is a large degree of dependence on foreign 
providers for products etc. related to information security measures., and a 
shortage of security personnel within Japan, and thus it is important for 
cyberspace-related operators to create a market through development of 
advanced technologies and products, cultivation of human resources with high 
abilities and the use and application of these resources for information security 
measures in order to strengthen the international competitiveness of Japan's 
"cybersecurity industry" .  
 
In order to construct a world-leading, resilient and vigorous cyberspace, and 
realize a cybersecurity nation, the government will continue to implement 
measures appropriate to an "accident assumed society" , continue to collaborate 
with other actors domestically, and relevant other countries and international 
organization, etc. and promote the measures stated below in the 3 year period 
until FY2015.   
Specific objectives for proceeding with the following measures include 
                                                                                                                                                            
perspective that the provision of safe and secure services would eventually lead to the improvement of their 
international competitiveness." 

 
29 
 
increasing the coverage of cyber attacks related information sharing networks in 
government institutions and critical infrastructure fields, improving CSIRT 
installation, malware infection67 and people’s anxieties,68 in addition increasing 
the number of nations possible of participating in international incident 
coordination69 and the numbers of partners such as nations for international 
collaboration and dialog on response to cyber attacks by 30% increase by 
FY2015. Also, doubling the size of domestic information security market70 and 
halving the deficiency ratio in security professionals as goals for 2020.  
In addition, as cybersecurity has become a common global issue, it is 
necessary to investigate and analyze overseas trends in policy, etc. related to 
cyber-attack incidents and cybersecurity while also exchanging information and 
carrying out other collaboration with various other foreign governments and 
countries when implementing the following measures.  
The government will revise the "Groups of Standards for Information 
Security Measures for Central Government Computer Systems",71 "The Second 
Action Plan on Information Security Measures for Critical Infrastructures" 
(hereinafter abbreviated as the "Second Action Plan"),72 the "Information 
Security Research and Development Strategy",73 the "Information Security 
Human Resource Development Program"74 and the "Information Security 
Outreach and Awareness Program"75 and other policy documents, establish new 
                                                  
67 For example, in Microsoft's "Security Intelligence Report", a CMM (Computers Cleaned per Mille. 
Indicates the number of PCs for which malware or unwanted software was removed per 1,000 executions 
of malicious software removal tools.) index is used to compare the conditions of various countries 
throughout the world. Japan's infection rate for the year of 2012 was 1 or less (0.7-0.9). 
68 For example, in the White Paper on Information and Communications, in regards to anxiety about 
internet usage, in 2011 the rate of household respondents who answered "I am worried about virus 
infection" was 72.8% and the rate of business respondents who answered "We have concerns about virus 
infection" was 41.4%, the highest ever for either of these responses.  
69 For example, currently at JPCERT/CC , there are approximately 80 countries with whom direct 
cooperation for incident coordination can be carried out between contact CSIRT. 
70 For example, in current conditions, the scale of the Japanese information security market (products and 
services) is 5,853,000,000 dollars (2010), 2nd place following the United States, making up 0.107% of 
Japan's GDP for 2010), a level closely matching that of the United States and the UK. In addition, in 
regards to the structure of the market, in Japan the market for services (4,425,000,000 dollars) is largest 
than the market for products (1,428,000,000 dollars). The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 
"Information Security Market Survey." 
71 Includes the "Standards for Information Security Measures for Central Government Computer Systems" 
April 21, 2011, Information Security Policy Council, Amended April 26, 2012), etc. 
72 February 3, 2009 Information Security Policy Council, amended April 26, 2012. 
73 July 8, 2011 Information Security Policy Council 
74 July 8, 2011 Information Security Policy Council 
75 July 8, 2011 Information Security Policy Council 

 
30 
 
plans, etc. as is necessary.   
 
In order to maintain the sustainability of cyberspace, in addition to reinforcing 
measures for responding to cyber attacks, Japan aims to construct "resilient" 
cyberspace and enhance its defensive and recovery capabilities against cyber 
attacks and other cyber incidents by improving such functions as for recognition 
and analysis of cyber attacks and for information sharing related to incidents . 
 
① Measures in government institutions 
Government institutions and other related organizations will improve the level 
of information security related to information and information systems and also 
strengthen and enhance its preparations to cope with cyber attacks. 
 
[Improvement of the level of information security related to information and 
information systems] 
A unified mechanism shall be strengthened at government institutions in order 
to emphasize information security measures according to their degree of 
importance and other factors for information such as state secrets and 
information systems, by establishing risk assessment methods related to 
management of cyber attacks such as targeted attacks. Further, an environment 
will be arranged to assure appropriate information security suited to the diverse 
working arrangements of government employees, including telework and 
BYOD, while continuing to adhere to disciplines. Additionally, usage of SNS 
will be allowed when providing important information to people with Japan 
bearing responsibility and enforcing discipline. 
The government shall strengthen the measures for its government-wide 
information 
system. 
Specifically, 
a 
government 
information 
system 
infrastructure which is resilient against cyber attacks and large scale disasters 
shall be constructed through such measures as converting government 

 
31 
 
information systems into the government common platform as its cloud 
computing service.76 Moreover, for the social security and tax number systems, 
strengthening of information security shall be promoted for the information 
sharing infrastructure system and related systems77 managed and operated by 
government institutions, local authorities and related organizations. In addition, 
measures shall be implemented to assure information security for promoting 
open data in e-government.78 
For government institution information systems, information security 
technological standardization and results of conformity with such are required at 
the design, manufacturing, installation and other stages, and strengthening of 
measures for existing known but unresolved vulnerabilities, use of compromised 
technologies, malware embedding and other supply chain risks. Specifically, 
these should be examined within the scope of approved in international 
agreements for the conditions of government procurement including utilization 
of conformity assessment systems based on international standards79 and 
application of required measures for assuring national security80 in the 
Agreement on Government Procurement. The use of technologies which have 
undergone safety assessment81 shall be promoted for encryption technologies. 
Additionally, information security measures shall be promoted in close 
collaboration with promotion of e-government.  
Information security shall be strengthened for handling of the critical 
information on national safety by operators other than the government 
institutions. For this type of information, information security conditions are 
guaranteed for outsourcing to information processors, standard procurement and 
                                                  
76 Began operations starting in March 2013. 
77 "Act Related to the Usage of Numbers for Identification of Specified Individuals in Administrative 
Procedures" (Number System Act) established at the Diet on May 24, 2013. 
78 "E-Government Open Data Strategy" (July 4, 2012, IT Strategic Headquarters). 
79 An example of IT security evaluation and certification schemes for international trade is CCRA 
(Common Criteria Recognition Agreement). 
80 WTO Agreement on Government Procurement. One of several agreements attached to the WTO 
agreement which came into force in January of 1995, binding only for the WTO member nations who 
separately ratified it. Exclusions of application are prescribed in Article 23 for cases of protecting serious 
profits for reasons of national security, etc. 
81 The " e-Government Recommended Ciphers List" (CRYPTREC (Cryptography Research and Evaluation 
Committees) Ciphers List) was decided in March of 2013 through assessment of the encryption 
technologies used in e-Government in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications and the 
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. 

 
32 
 
subsidiary businesses,82 however in addition to this, reporting of incident 
information related to cyber attacks to the ordering ministries and sharing of 
information between the operators shall be promoted. In addition, a framework 
shall be constructed allowing for the utilization of risk assessment methods in 
the above-noted government institutions.  
For independent administrative agencies, government affiliated corporations 
and other entities with a close relationship to the government, information 
security will be strengthened for supply chain risks based on government 
institution measures. Reporting of incident information to ministries with 
jurisdiction over the entity, voluntarily reporting to ministries handling the case 
and sharing of information with related institutions shall be promoted in order to 
prevent spread of damages while strengthening functions for recognizing cyber 
attacks related incidents. 
 
[Strengthening and enhancement of preparations to cope with cyber attacks] 
Drastic improvements shall be made to capabilities for recognizing and 
analyzing cyber attacks at government institutions, etc. and countermeasures in 
the event of incidents shall be strengthened and enhanced.  
Specifically, the GSOC83 shall be fundamentally strengthened, and items 
subject to monitoring expanded further, technologies and organizational 
frameworks shall be prepared for effective collection and advanced analysis of 
incident information from monitored sites, and a system will be prepared to use 
the results of attack method analysis etc. in order to improve risk assessment 
methods above mentioned. In addition, a system shall be established to share the 
collected incident information, analysis results and other information with 
government institutions being monitored, as well as with critical related 
institutions such as critical infrastructure providers. 
                                                  
82 "Regarding Notation of Information Security Requirements in Procurement" was released to the various 
ministries, etc. on January 24, 2012 based on the results of the studies of the "Subcommittee for 
Strengthening Public-Private Collaboration" established in the Information Security Measure Promotion 
Council (CISO Council) which is in turn established in the Information Security Policy Meetings. 
83 Government Security Operation Coordination team. Formed in order to strengthen government 
institutions capability to deal with emergencies related to information security issues such as external cyber 
attacks and put into operation in April of 2008. 

 
33 
 
The collaboration among the GSOC, the CYMAT84 and the CSIRT of each 
government institution at the time of incident occurrence shall be strengthened 
in order for immediate sharing of incident information and a full readiness 
system by the government together. In addition, in anticipation of large-scale 
cyber attacks85 and these possibilities countermeasures for the occurrence of 
incidents, such as initial response training, have been established86 in Japan 
already, and attempts have been made to strengthen information collection and 
aggregation systems for both normal and incident occurrence circumstances. 
Hereafter, further strengthening of countermeasures, such as annual 
implementation of training for handling of large-scale cyber attacks with 
participation of relevant government institutions and other related entities shall 
also be carried out.   
In addition to strengthening the handling capabilities of the government for 
both normal and emergency situations, it is also necessary to engage in the 
securing and cultivation of human resources in order to promote international 
collaboration. Specifically, proactive employment of outstanding external 
human resources, promotion of personnel exchanges between public and private 
sectors and among ministries, and improvement of continual development of 
capabilities through personnel rotations. Additionally, the cultivation such as 
trainings of the personnel in both the CSIRT in each government institution, etc. 
and the CYMAT should be strengthened in order to carry out prompt and precise 
response.  
While information gathering activities are actively carried out against Japan, 
recently methods of using targeted attacks by email to steal information from 
government institutions, etc., have become more complex and sophisticated, and 
the risks of critical information in government institutions being leaked is 
                                                  
84 CYber incident Mobile Assistant Team (Information security emergency support team). Established in 
the NISC in June of 2012, and provides technical support and advice related to preventing spread of 
damages, recovery, cause investigation and recurrence prevention in the event of cyber-attacks against 
ministries or other agencies under the National Information Security Center director who is the government 
CISO. 
85 Refers to cyber-attack conditions or potential conditions which result in serious harm to the lives, health 
or finances of citizens, or to national territory, or poses the thread of causing such harm. For example, 
conditions such as cyber-attacks resulting in injury or loss of life or serious interruptions in the supply of 
critical infrastructure services. 
86 Based on "The Government Initial Response System for Emergencies" (November 21, 2003, Cabinet 
decision), "The Initial Response for Large-scale Cyber Attacks" (March 19, 2010, Deputy Chief Cabinet 
Secretary for Crisis Management) etc. 

 
34 
 
increasing.  Therefore construction of a stronger information assurance system 
is necessary by such measures as intensified cooperation with foreign 
institutions while greatly promoting measures for gathering, analysis and sharing 
of counter-intelligence related information in cyberspace with each government 
institution working closely.  
 
② Measures in critical infrastructure providers 
In the critical infrastructure field, it is necessary to ensure that people's lives, 
socioeconomic activities, government activities and all activities can stably and 
reliable continue, and thus it is necessary to implement information security 
measures in accordance with such as government institutions do based on the 
characteristics of the information systems requiring protection.  
Specifically, for critical infrastructure, in order to focus on information 
security based on risk assessment methods for critical infrastructure providers 
and other related organizations, it is necessary to extract risks desirable to take 
measures in a cross-cutting fashion across fields through understanding and 
assessment of the establishment and changes of the latest safety standards in 
each infrastructure field87 and through risk analysis, and to establish processes to 
reflect these results in the guides88 for safety standards in each field.  
The sharing such information as failures, cyber attacks, threats and 
vulnerabilities between critical infrastructure providers and CEPTOAR89 shall 
be continuously promoted. About information on targeted attacks for which 
sharing across industries is difficult, a confidentiality agreement-based 
information sharing system shall be developed and expanded.90 In addition, for 
                                                  
87 "Safety standards" refers to documents specified as reference materials or standards when critical 
infrastructure providers make determinations and carry out actions (The Second Action Plan). 
88 "Guides" refers to "Principles for Formulating of 'Safety Standards, Guidelines, etc.' concerning 
Assurance of Information Security of Critical Infrastructures" and the "Countermeasures Edition" of the 
same as well as follow-up documents.Capability for Engineering of Protection, Technical Operation, 
Analysis and Response (CEPTOAR). System for sharing and analyzing information in the 10 critical 
infrastructure fields. 
89 Capability for Engineering of Protection, Technical Operation, Analysis and Response (CEPTOAR). 
System for sharing and analyzing information in the 10 critical infrastructure fields. 
90 For example, the J-CSIP：Initiative for Cyber Security Information Sharing Partnership of Japan, is a 
measure by IPA and private organization for the countermeasures against targeted cyber attacks as measures 
related to critical infrastructure providers. 

 
35 
 
rapid reporting by critical infrastructure providers to the ministries with 
jurisdiction over their places of business, voluntarily reporting to ministries  
handling the case, and information sharing with related organizations, promotion 
shall be carried out with regard for personal information and confidential 
information. Moreover, promotion shall be carried out for cyber exercises 
between critical infrastructure providers, cyberspace-related operators and such 
related entities as relevant CSIRTs based on a premise of confidential 
relationships between private organizations, in order to strengthen collaborative 
response capabilities for cyber attacks.  
In addition to strengthening handling of supply chain risks in critical 
infrastructure fields, it is also important to introduce evaluation and certification 
of information security. Specifically, promotion of collaboration through 
information sharing of vulnerability information and attack information, etc. 
between critical infrastructure providers and cyberspace-related operators, 
examination of how to introduce evaluation and certification modeled on 
international standards for procurement and operation of SCADA and other 
control system equipment and systems, and promotion of measures aimed at 
establishing institutions for evaluation and certification of control system 
equipment and systems.  
There are fields which are not currently considered critical infrastructure 
fields in Japan, but for which any failure of the information systems has the 
potential to have as a great an effect on the lives of people and socioeconomic 
activities as any such failure in the existing 10 critical infrastructure fields.  
Hereafter it is necessary to examine the scope of critical infrastructure and 
measures according to the characteristics of each field based on the positioning 
of the information systems in the relevant infrastructure.   
Based on the above, a new action plan will be determined once the Second 
Action Plan is reviewed.  
In addition, on the assumption of large-scale cyber attacks countermeasures 
for the occurrence of incidents, such as initial response training, have been 
established in Japan already, and attempts have been made to strengthen 
information collection and aggregation systems for both normal and incident 
occurrence circumstances. Hereafter, in order for the public and private sectors 

 
36 
 
to be able to collaborate and carry out appropriate measures in the event of  
large-scale cyber attacks, further strengthening of countermeasures, such as 
annual implementation of training for handling of large-scale cyber attacks shall 
also be carried out by relevant parties, using cases in other countries as reference 
where necessary. 
 
③ Measures in private companies, educational institutions and research 
institutions 
Recognition and analysis capabilities for such incidents as cyber attacks while 
sharing of such information shall be strengthened at private companies, 
educational institutions and research institutions which handle critical 
information such as important trade secrets and other business secrets, 
intellectual property information and personal information, which is the source 
of Japan's international competitiveness. In addition information security 
measures at overseas destination of the businesses shall be promoted. 
For small and medium-sized enterprises, for which the ensuring of 
information security specialist personnel and sufficient investment is becoming 
difficult, it is necessary to arrange an environment for strengthening such cyber 
attack related functions as incident recognition capabilities. Specifically, systems 
will be arranged for sharing of information and consultations between small and 
medium-sized enterprises, tax systems which promote information security 
investment and other incentives will be examined, guidelines and tool which are 
easy to use to improve information security will be prepared, and transition to a 
common usage system with guaranteed information security by such 
technologies as cloud computing will be promoted.  
In addition to promoting the analysis of information on incidents recognized 
at small and medium-sized enterprises as well as sharing of countermeasure 
information etc., implementing practical defense exercises which examine 
defense models for cyber attacks and utilize practice test beds for not just large 
scale companies but also for small and medium-sized enterprises and so on, will 
improve capability to respond to and deal with cyber attacks.   
Capability to respond dynamically in the event of incidents to prevent the 

 
37 
 
spread of damage will be improved at private companies, research institutions 
and other related organizations, construction of CSIRTs will be promoted, and 
the capability to respond collaboratively between CSIRTs will be strengthened.   
As management uncertainty increases for businesses as a result of intensifying 
of the risks surrounding cyberspace, for the possibility and other factors of 
incidents related to cyber attacks in listed companies, the possibility of 
disclosing business risks to investors will be examined while continuing to give 
consideration to maintaining fair competitive conditions. During this 
examination, the potential and conditions for a framework for promoting 
incentives to disclose including sharing relevant information, will also be 
considered.  
In addition, for educational institutions, in order to reduce the work, increase 
efficiency and improve the quality of educational activities in elementary and 
middle school education, the usage and application of information 
communications technologies continues to progress as a result of increased 
informatization in such fields as school affairs. Therefore propagation and 
education related to information security will be promoted to the actors 
responsible for establishing schools such as local public authorities in order to 
assure information security, including response to cyber attacks.  
 
④ Cyberspace hygiene  
As the merger and integration of cyberspace and real-space continues, it is 
becoming more important for preventative measures to be implemented against 
unauthorized intrusions, malware infections, and other events by the various 
actors who mutually depend on cyberspace. However, as risks continue to 
increase seriously, it is becoming more difficult for general users such as 
individuals to carry out measures through independent efforts alone, and the 
active support of other actors is necessary to reinforce those measures.  
For comprehensive and intensive outreach and awareness raising aimed at 
cultivating awareness in general users such as individuals and businesses, 
relevant events are held as part of "Information Security Awareness Month", 
which is held in February of every year, and the "International Cyber Security 

 
38 
 
Campaign", held in October of every year. Hereafter, in addition to carrying out 
measures throughout the entire government, measures will be carried out aimed 
at fomenting an increased awareness in general users in order to make 
cyberspace hygiene a national movement as one part of this endeavor, such 
measures will include, for example, coordination with software education, which 
forms the basis of information security, such as the Open University of Japan 
"Informatics Course,"91 issuing of awards for distinguished services as a part of 
newly established "Cyber Clean Day" (provisional name).  
Further, for daily effective outreach and awareness, in addition to carrying out 
such measures as promotion for collection of vulnerability related information 
and cooperation with various internet fixed point observation systems, 
frameworks will be examined for visualizing the degree of vulnerability of 
Japan's cyberspace, degree of malware infections and other overall trends, as 
well as for carrying out appropriate outreach to general users.  
It is necessary to improve the capability to respond to attacks for cyberspace 
as a whole, and provide effective precautions and other useful measures to 
general users through cooperation between government institutions and 
cyberspace-related operators and improvement of functions for recognizing and 
analyzing cyber attacks related incidents. Specifically, through such activities as 
the "Cyber attacks Analysis Council,"92 in addition to mobilizing each 
institution's specialist capabilities and collected information and carrying out 
advanced analysis while maintaining the confidential relationships with the 
incident information providers and other related players, capability to respond to 
cyber attacks will be strengthened by utilizing the information in carrying out 
various measures, for example, individual incident handling, providing 
precautions to general users, examination of mid to long term countermeasures 
and research and development. 
                                                  
91 The Informatics Course has been established, starting from April of 2013, in order to provide students 
with the skills to solve problems from an information point of view in addition to learning on information 
processing, from the 5 areas of software, information mathematics, multimedia, human interface and 
intelligence infrastructure. 
92 Composed of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and 
Industry, the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (Hereinafter abbreviated as 
"NICT"), the IPA, Telecom-ISAC Japan, and JPCERT/CC in order to implement the advanced analysis 
necessary for defense against cyber-attacks. 

 
39 
 
As countermeasures against network type bot viruses, at the CCC,93 which is 
a public/private partnerships implemented with the cooperation of ISPs,94 
measures were carried out to provide general users with precautions. Hereafter, a 
framework will be constructed for the implementation by ISPs and other related 
entities of the creation of a database for storing information on malicious sites 
which distribute malware and providing precautions to general users who 
attempt to access malicious sites and other measures. In addition promotion will 
be carried out for advancement of database functions including strengthening of 
functions for detecting malicious sites.   
For the behavior of potential malware, in addition to carrying out 
development of technologies for quick and advanced detection, based on the 
increased complexity and sophistication of cyber attacks and other increasing 
serious risk surrounding cyberspace, examinations will be carried out on  
flexible operations of relevant systems with consideration for confidentiality of 
communications and other interests such as the potential for communication 
analysis for information security purposes.  
In an environment where components of home information appliances, 
medical 
equipment, 
automobiles, 
and 
social 
infrastructure 
such 
as 
communications networks are controlled by embedded software, there is a 
potential threat to people's lives if there is any troubles such as failures in these 
software. Taking these conditions into account, and while attempting to maintain 
international coordination, in addition to examining systems for handling 
vulnerabilities in software related to these items, promotion will be carried out 
for strengthening of the explanatory capabilities for software quality so that 
cyberspace-related operators who provide these devices and services are able to 
provide users with sufficient explanations of software quality.  
 
⑤ Crime Countermeasures for Cyberspace 
In order to be able to respond to the various situations that may potentially 
                                                  
93 Cyber Clean Center. Implemented as a project from FY2006 to FY2010 through the cooperation of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, 
Telecom-ISAC Japan, JPCERT/CC and the IPA. 
94 Internet Service Provider. Internet connection service providers who provide internet connections to 
general user and business customers utilizing fiber optic lines and other means. 

 
40 
 
occur in cyberspace in the future, it is necessary to strengthen the 
countermeasures against cyber attacks which may affect the national security 
and crisis management by strengthening capabilities to deal with cybercrimes 
and utilizing the knowledge and capabilities of private sector operators.  
Specifically, in addition to strengthening investigative and analysis 
capabilities through the employment of personnel with specialized knowledge 
and capabilities and carrying out effective education and training and research 
on new technologies, system preparation will be carried out through expansion 
of organizations such as the Cyber Attack Analysis Center, the Cyber Attack 
Special Investigations Unit and the Unauthorized Program Analysis Center, 
information collection and analysis equipment will be enhanced and 
strengthened and preparation of equipment including the advancement of 
internet monitoring systems, will be carried out. 
For strengthening of measures utilizing the knowledge and capabilities of 
private sector operators, starting with the creation of the Japanese NCFTA,95 
new information sharing frameworks will be constructed with anti-virus vendors 
related to new types of viruses, measures for sharing information through 
cooperation with the private sector, including the "Council to Prevent 
Unauthorized Communications as a Cyber Intelligence Measure,"96 shall be 
strengthened, and cooperation related to sharing of technical information for 
electronic devices subject to analysis will be strengthened as means of 
promoting information sharing. Moreover, in addition to promoting joint private 
and public sector cybercrime prevention measures, such as strengthening cyber 
patrols and promoting measures to prevent damages related to smartphone 
                                                  
95 National Cyber-Forensics and Training Alliance. A non-profit organization established in the United 
States and made up of members from the FBI, private sector businesses and academic institutions. Carries 
out training of personnel for investigatory agencies, including those overseas, related to cybercrime related 
information collection and analysis. 
96 In addition to the "Council to Prevent Unauthorized Communications as a Cyber Intelligence Measure", 
which carries out sharing of information, etc., related to cyber attacks thought to be planned to steal 
information from operators providing services for dealing with security matters or security monitoring 
services, other examples include the "Cyber-terrorism Countermeasures Council", provides information 
related to cyber-terrorism from the police, talks by private sector experts, opinion exchanges between 
member operators and information sharing and is composed of critical infrastructure providers and other 
members from every prefecture. In addition, the "Cyber Intelligence Information Sharing Network" has 
been formed as a network for sharing information related to cyber-attacks thought to be planned in order to 
steal information, and the "Unauthorized Program Countermeasures Council" has been established to carry 
out sharing of information related to unauthorized program countermeasures between anti-virus software 
providers, etc. 

 
41 
 
applications, efforts will also be made to utilize private sector knowledge and 
capabilities in investigations such as commission of method analysis to private 
sector operators.  
Consideration will be given to measures for preserving logs such as 
communication histories, and promotion of digital forensics at relevant operators 
in order to assure traceability for cybercrimes after the fact. Regarding saving of 
communication histories in particular, consideration will be carried out on their 
use in cybercrime investigations with due consideration given to the 
confidentiality of communications, types of effective communication histories 
for security, burdens of the communications operator saving the logs, storage 
periods of logs in foreign countries, and the diverse opinions of people as 
general users,.  
For criminal investigation and police fields, systems for control and other 
functions will be strengthened through human resource development and other 
means in order to appropriately deal with cybercrimes.   
 
⑥ Defense of Cyberspace 
It is important for Japan to strengthen overall response capabilities for the 
event of targeted attacks aimed at theft or destruction of critical information 
such as national secrets, cyber attacks carried out as part of an armed attack by 
foreign governments97 and other national level cyber attacks for which the 
involvement of foreign governments is suspected.  
Specifically, in addition to clarification of the roles of institutions and 
strengthening of systems related to functions such as recognition of incidents 
related to ordinary cyber attacks, collection and sharing information such as 
incident information, and advanced analysis of collected and shared information 
which can contribute to the identification of the actors behind attacks, the 
collaboration between these institutions shall be strengthened.  
Cyberspace is a new "domain" just as land, sea, air and space in which a 
                                                  
97 The Prime Minister's response to the Lower House plenary session on March 4, 2013 stated, "a variety of 
discussions and debated are still ongoing regarding the relationship between cyber attacks and an armed 
attack and others, and it is difficult to provide a categorical answer at this time." 

 
42 
 
variety of activities, such as intelligence, offence and defense, are carried out by 
organizations such as the Self Defense Force and the effective use of this 
domain is important, and as a vital infrastructure which support various 
activities in the actual domain such as land, utilized for policy making and unit 
mobilization and other tasks, the secure use of cyberspace is critical.  
Above all, in the event that cyber attacks are carried out as part of an armed 
attack, the Ministry of Defense and the Self Defense Force are tasked with 
responding to these, and in order to execute this, the Self Defense Force must 
first ensure that appropriate measures against cyber attacks are implemented on 
its own systems. Specifically this means implementing measures aimed at 
strengthening the Self Defense Force's capabilities and preparedness in 
cyberspace, including improving of surveillance abilities in DII98 networks, 
realistic exercises in an environment that simulates conditions of the MOD 
systems, alert capabilities by improving such functions as of the security and 
analysis devices for cyber defense, establishing organization through the new 
addition of a Cyber Defense unit (provisional name), steadily retaining talented 
personnel with advanced expertise, and carrying out advanced research and 
development.   
The roles of the relevant organizations during times of emergency including 
the way of mutual support shall be arranged, for example, the roles of the 
Ministry of Defense, the Self Defense Force and other government institutions 
regarding cyber attacks against such information systems as critical 
infrastructure systems other than defense related systems, and the roles of 
cyberspace-related operators regarding unauthorized communications from 
overseas, while preparation of organizations, frameworks for sharing of 
information including classified information and systems shall be carried out. 
During this examination, the application of individual specific international laws 
will be considered.  
 
In order to maintain the expansivity of cyberspace, Japan aims to construct 
                                                  
98 Defense Information Infrastructure. 

 
43 
 
"vigorous" cyberspace through the activation of industry which plays a central 
role in responding to cyber attacks, developing advanced technologies, carrying 
out training and fostering of human resources and literacy, and other measures, 
and aims to strengthen the creativity and knowledge which will allow it to 
independently respond to the risks surrounding cyberspace.  
 
① Activation of industry 
In order to promptly and appropriately respond to new risks while taking in 
new growth markets and gathering information on cyber attacks and other useful 
information in overseas markets, it is necessary to strengthen the international 
competitiveness of Japan's cybersecurity industry, which is highly dependent on 
foreign technologies, services and products.  
Advanced technology, products, and services and the leading researchers and 
technical experts who create them constitute vital infrastructure for the 
propagation and advancement of information communications technologies as 
well as the development of their use and application. As the usage and 
application of information communications technologies becomes more 
important in the improvement of innovation and productivity in a variety of 
fields through the expansion of the base of information communication 
technologies utilization and in the use of big data to create new businesses, 
advanced research and development on information security as an integral part 
of these utilization and preparation of systems including international 
standardization and evaluation and certification, are necessary. 
Specially, efforts will be made to strengthen research and development in 
such as M2M-based smart community, smart grid, smart city and smart town 
related information security technologies, advanced secure device technologies 
for promoting new services utilizing personal data, anonymization and 
encryption technologies, technologies for controlling entire networks through 
large quantities of various types of data by software, and technologies for 
identifying individuals in cyberspace.  
Hereafter, products and services which utilize information communication 
technologies will be faced with requirements for cybersecurity related reliability 

 
44 
 
in international transactions, and it can be assumed that the importance of 
international standardization, evaluation and certification, and information 
security auditing will grow in order to provide proof of this reliability. For this 
reason, it is necessary for Japan to proactively participate in and work on 
international standardization and the creation of international mutual recognition 
frameworks for evaluation and certification99 in order to ensure that Japan's 
businesses are in an advantageous position in international trade.100 In addition, 
it is necessary to support related private sectors and to develop a function for 
evaluation and certification in Japan. Specifically, progress should be made in 
international standardization of cloud computing services, enactment of 
common international security requirements for multi-functional devices, and 
preparation of evaluation and certification bodies for industrial control systems 
focusing on security verification facilities.101  
Having the government proactively carry out the procurement of products 
which utilize new technologies promotes private sector businesses, product 
development, practical application and acquisition of overseas markets while 
also fostering venture businesses. In addition, promotion will be carried out for 
cooperation which overcomes the boundaries between industry and 
organizations and global development of businesses with latent potential in 
order to have companies in Japan which are strong enough to stand on an equal 
footing with global competition in the cybersecurity field. 
The clarification of the application of copyright laws regarding reverse 
engineering for security purposes, and the reform of laws and regulations which 
may hinder industrial activation such as the realization of advanced services 
through analysis of big data, are critical.  
 
② Research and development 
The risks surrounding cyberspace are expected to change rapidly as a result of 
                                                  
99 For example, footnote No.79. 
100 ISO/IEC 27001 Information Security Management System (ISMS) is a major cyber security 
international standard and approximately 4,000 organizations have been certified in Japan in the 10 years 
since 2002. 
101 The Technological Research Association Control System Security Center (CSSC) was established on 
March 6, 2012. 

 
45 
 
the increasing complexity and sophistication of cyber attacks, and preexisting 
information security measures may result in delays in establishment and 
implementation of effective measures and suffer from rapid decreases in efficacy. 
For this reason, it is important to create information security technologies that 
are creative and imaginative to counter these changing risks.  
Specifically, for the purposes of Japan maintaining and improving its own 
leading research and development, the research and development and practical 
testing of technologies aimed at improving the cyber attack detection and 
advanced analysis functions at research institutions and relevant organizations102 
shall be accelerated.   
In particular, in addition to introducing theoretical approaches to information 
security research such as encryption research in order to allow for the 
establishment of effective and innovative technologies for dealing with the 
diversifying and more advanced cyber attacks, such as latent malware. In 
addition development will be carried out on leading technologies for countering 
near future cyber-attacks. Development of semiconductor devices which support 
security is also important.  
Further, in order to protect people's information and rights, social systems, 
leading technologies aimed at establishing information security measure 
technologies related to inhibiting IC operation errors will be developed.  
Research and development will also be carried out on technologies for assuring 
the reliability of entire network systems which include the various individual 
data of which big data is realized through the propagation of SDN, as well as the 
software used to process these data.  
The knowledge obtained through this research and development will be 
shared between industry, academia and the government, and used to promote the 
improvement of Japan's defensive capabilities. In addition, these measures can 
also be expected to contribute to the cultivation of advanced information 
security personnel throughout all of Japan, and because these technologies could 
potentially become something that could be deployed worldwide, this could also 
                                                  
102 For example, "CYREC" (CYbersecurity REsearch Center), a cybersecurity research and development 
base collecting information from all of Japan, was constructed and put into full operation in April 2013 
aimed at improving analysis capabilities at the NICT. 

 
46 
 
lead to the creation of a new industry starting in Japan, leading to economic 
growth.  
 
③ Human resource development 
In these conditions where all of Japan's activities are dependent on cyberspace, 
it is difficult to handle increasing serious risks simply through the cultivation of 
human resources to carry out countermeasures to protect one's own 
organizations at measure implementation entities such as the government 
institutions and businesses. As such, it is necessary to widen the base of these 
advanced and international personnel due to the expansion of the use and 
application of information communication technologies through the expansion 
and penetration of cyberspace.  
At present, it is said that approximately 265,000 individuals are employed in 
information security within Japan, however there is a potential deficiency of 
approximately 80,000 such security personnel. In addition, of these 265,000 
individuals, the number of individuals who actually possess the required level of 
skills is thought to be slightly over 105,000, meaning that some sort of education 
or training is necessary for the remaining 160,000 individuals.103 
In addition to it being necessary to resolve this deficiency in the number of 
security personnel that can be utilized in existing information communications 
technology, the expansion of information communication technologies 
accompanying the expansion and penetration of cyberspace will become an 
issue that must be dealt with, resulting in an even greater deficiency of security 
personnel in the future, making the recruitment, training, and use of these 
personnel even more necessary.   
In addition to proactive measures being required to handle this deficiency in 
personnel, another large issue is the ensuring of personnel who possess 
exceptional capabilities which cannot be acquired through training alone. In 
regard to this securing of personnel, private and public sectors will collaborate 
to implement training camps to discover and cultivate the outstanding 
individuals who have not only creative and original ideas and technologies in the 
                                                  
103 IPA estimate. 

 
47 
 
software related fields, but also the capabilities to apply them, as well as 
competitions which will test the practical skills of information security 
personnel.  
In order to raise the skill level of cybersecurity professionals within Japan, 
and to discover and cultivate exceptional personnel in the field, a framework is 
necessary for practical application of training throughout all of society. 
Specifically, there are a wide variety of personnel labeled information security 
personnel, and the skills required vary greatly depending upon the attributes of 
the specific personnel, so the required skills and knowledge will be clarified 
through improvement and utilization of skill standards.   
Consideration, will be carried out, in accordance with the diversity of needs 
for 
information 
security 
personnel, 
about 
such 
issues 
as 
a 
qualification/capability assessment system based on security levels, which 
include enhancing specialized educational curriculums at universities and other 
learning institutions for practical training programs, strengthening of industry 
and academia cooperation, and the need for improvement and new establishment 
of official certification and skill assessment systems, while utilizing the skill 
standards. 
Because the training of personnel who can perform globally is important, in 
addition to supporting participation in international conferences and study 
abroad at specialist graduate schools and other related organizations overseas, 
invitations to and holding of international conferences within Japan will also be 
promoted.   
It is also necessary for the discovery and training of personnel to lead directly 
to their employment and utilization. For this purpose, government institutions 
shall take the initiative in appointing external information security personnel.  
 
④ Literacy Improvement 
In Japan, cyberspace is expanding and penetrating into every generation from 
the youth bracket to the elderly, every situation including individuals, families, 
workplaces and public facilities, and everyday life and socioeconomic activities 

 
48 
 
of real-space. In this way, all general people coexist with cyberspace, and it is 
thus necessary to continually work to improve the literacy of very broad base of 
general people. In addition, this also contributes to creating a foundation for the 
cultivation of advanced personnel.  
Specifically, it is necessary to plan awareness raising activities starting from 
the elementary and middle school education stages, and implement participatory 
awareness raising projects such as motto and poster contests. At the elementary 
and middle school education stages, depending upon the development stages of 
the student children, learning activities have be enhanced so that computers and 
information communications networks and other information tools can be used 
for instruction in each subject, positive promotion has be carried out for 
education on information morals, including information security.  Hereafter, 
practical measures united with the utilization of information communication 
technologies in various fields of education, such as use of digital textbooks for 
students and education on software programming, will be promoted.   
Information security measures for the elderly will so become even more 
important in the future, so environments will be prepared for the cultivation and 
utilization of information security related supporters and detailed follow up for 
the elderly.   
Smart devices, especially smartphones, which are always turned on and 
connected to the internet while carried around by users, handle a variety of 
information about the user such as position information, however structural 
restrictions limit the effectiveness of information security software, so further 
improvement of individual literacy is required.    
Specifically, with the shift to smartphones, the majority of the expanded usage 
rates are for SNS,104 and it is planned to collaborate with relevant operators to 
implement effective measures for smartphone use. In addition, a framework will 
be constructed which allows users to understand the risks of smartphone 
applications and make determinations regarding these use on their own.  
Taking into account the rapid progress of information communication 
                                                  
104 According to the White Pater on Information and Communications, the changes in usage rates before 
and after the shift to smart phones for SNS increased greatly from 37.9% before the transition to 62.6% 
after the transition. 

 
49 
 
technologies, it is necessary to update information related to measures to 
improve the literacy of general users in a timely fashion. For this reason, it is 
important that government institutions collect information through measures for 
responding to cyber attacks, analyze this information and then provide the 
information nationwide in a format that is easy to understand for general users.  
In order to keep up with a global cyberspace, "world-leading" cyberspace 
shall be constructed and attempts shall be made to strengthen contribution and 
outreach capabilities in the global strategic space by strengthening ministerial 
level dispatches, active participation in the international rulemakings, active 
outreach into overseas markets, capacity building support and confidence 
building measures.  
 
① Diplomacy 
In Japan, free flow of information in cyberspace is a basic policy, and the 
basic values such as freedom of expression are assured through this policy, 
providing a variety of benefits including economic growth.   
Because it is impossible for Japan to handle risks which have expanded to a 
global scale on its own, it is important to multilaterally build and strengthen 
partnerships with other nations and regions which share the same basic values 
including the basic policy, democracy, respect for basic human rights, and the 
rule of law. For this reason, it is necessary to carry out diplomacy which 
promotes a balanced approach to constructing a safe and reliable cyberspace in 
by not applying excessive administration or restrictions by the state while 
maintaining its openness and interoperability. 
For the application of international laws to acts using cyberspace, it is 
important that existing international laws continue to be applied to acts using 
cyberspace in terms of maintaining a degree of order in cyberspace, and the 
deliberation will continue on how to apply specific international laws such as the 
Charter of the United Nations and the International Humanitarian Law to 

 
50 
 
conducts in cyberspace. 
While cyber attacks for which the involvement of foreign governments is 
suspected have actually occurred overseas, because it is difficult to identify 
perpetrators of cyber attacks, it is necessary to steadily implement confidence- 
building measures in order to avoid unexpected escalation that are not intended 
by parties, for instance as a result of misidentification of attackers.   
In addition to continuing discussions and dialogs with countries with whom 
Japan has carried out bilateral discussions and dialogs so far, Japan will also 
expand to holding discussions and dialogs or opinion exchanges with other 
countries and regions as well. In addition, the country will actively participate in 
multi country discussions and meetings including regional frameworks such as 
the ARF105 and other related committees in the United Nations, in addition to 
various cybersecurity related conferences with participation from multiple 
stakeholders other than just government institutions and "face to face" 
participation in the global community.  
In order to rapidly and appropriately respond to cyber attacks, cooperation 
with the United States, in which Japan is in an alliance based on the Japan-U.S. 
Security Arrangements, is vital. Based on the understanding that the variety of 
issues surrounding cyberspace recently are pressing matters for both national 
security and economy, further discussion on sharing threat information, detailed 
measures including joint training exercises for critical infrastructure protection 
and other area, and creation of international rulemakings, shall be carried out 
through future dialogs such as the Japan-U.S. Cyber Dialogue. 
 
② Global outreach 
In a global cyberspace, vulnerable countries and regions are targeted as 
springboards from which to launch cyber attacks. The conditions, related to 
cybersecurity such as technological capabilities for responding to incidents 
including cyber attacks, are various from country to country. Therefore it is 
expected that each is construction a given capabilities such as for handling 
                                                  
105 ASEAN Regional Forum. A forum aimed at improving the security environment of the Asia-Pacific 
region through dialogs and cooperation related to political and security issues. 

 
51 
 
incidents, in terms that this will lead to the formation of a common 
understanding in international society and serve as a deterrent for cyber attacks.  
Consequently, it is important to build relationships in with newly emerging 
nations as well as developing countries in ASEAN and other regions in which 
those countries and Japan can develop together, and actively provide support for 
building the capabilities to deal with cyber attacks against these countries and 
regions.  
Specifically, this includes providing support for the building of CSIRT in each 
nation, security management knowhow support, international awareness raising, 
developing a network to collect information about cyber attacks by collaborating 
with other nations, then implementing research and development projects on 
technologies for prediction and quick response to cyber attacks and expanding 
the participant countries.  
Also, introduction of best practices such as the botnet countermeasure 
projects through public-private partnership, implementation of joint projects, 
and conducting tabletop exercises with overseas operators, will be promoted.  
About the encryption assessment project106 working to assure safety and 
reliability in electronic government and other fields, the results will be 
announced both domestically and abroad, while the use of encryption 
technologies will be promoted.  
In addition, in international trade, cybersecurity safety is coming to be 
required for products and services which utilize various information 
communication technologies. Therefore in order to ensure that Japan does not 
find itself at a disadvantage in its strong fields, such as multi-functional devices 
including copiers and control systems, Japan will actively participate in and 
work on international standardization of security and the creation of 
international frameworks for mutual recognition of evaluation and certification, 
from a viewpoint of activation of industry,.  
Further, Japan will require that the practices often seen in newly emerging 
nations and other regions of using information security as an excuse for import 
restrictions and measures for giving preferential treatment to domestic goods be 
                                                  
106 CRYPTREC. 

 
52 
 
made to conform to international trade rules. Also, Japan will work towards the 
promotion of the international development of Japanese businesses by working 
to assure the compliance with relevant domestic and overseas systems. For 
example, consideration will be held for actively contributing to the 
establishment of harmonized international rules through the support of 
preparation of systems in newly emerging countries and other region, and 
domestic systems for international distribution of personal data.   
 
③ International cooperation 
Attempts will be made to strengthen international collaboration in order to 
effectively respond to cybercrime, which can easily be carried out across 
national borders. Specifically, information related to cybercrimes will be 
continuously exchanged with foreign investigating organizations in addition to 
dispatching staff to improve collaboration with foreign investigation agencies as 
well as to learn the latest in investigative techniques.  
In the event the cooperation of foreign investigation agencies is required in 
order to gather evidence, mutual legal assistance will be proactively requested of 
these agencies and an international investigation promoted in an appropriate 
manner.  
Regarding international cooperation related to cybercrime countermeasures, 
Japan has ratified the Convention on Cybercrime,107 and will work to strengthen 
rapid and effective mutual investigations and other cooperation between law 
enforcement agencies including increasing the number of countries party to the 
convention.  
In addition, the promotion of sharing of information through international 
collaboration, and understanding of international trends in incidents related to 
cyber attacks is important. Specifically, in addition to strengthening 
collaboration108 at the operation level for promotion of sharing of incident 
                                                  
107 "Convention on Cybercrime." Ratified in the Japanese Diet in April of 2004, coming into effect on 
November 1, 2012 through the enactment of the "Law for Partial Revision of the Penal Code, etc. to 
Respond to Increase in International and Organized Crimes and Advancement of Information Processing" 
(2011 Law No. 74, the so-called "Cyber Penal Code") in June of 2011. 
108 For CSIRT international cooperation, there is the international conference FIRST (Forum of Incident 
Response and Security Teams), with participation from the NISC, the National Police Agency Cyber Force 

 
53 
 
information related to cyber attacks between CSIRTs, supporting the cultivation 
or human resources related to cybercrime investigations and prosecution as well 
as the preparation of the criminal justice systems in various countries.   
In order to avoid unexpected situations arising out of mutual distrust, it is 
important to implement confidence-building measures. For this reason, Japan 
shares its basic stance and best practices. Further, in addition to maintaining a 
mutual contact system for incident occurrence from times of peace, 
collaborative international research projects and responding exercises on cyber 
attacks among multiple nations shall also be implemented. 
Moreover, this will also contribute to international collaboration with the 
various countries, promoting the preparation of an international network through 
redundancy of international connects between Japan and overseas.  
 
The NISC is strengthening its functions as Japan's command post for 
constructing a world-leading, resilient and vigorous cyberspace. Specifically, in 
addition to drastically strengthening of the GSOC, the organization will also 
strengthen its collection of information such as incidents which are related to 
cyber attacks, analysis and publicity related to the current situations of relevant 
measures of governments and actual circumstances of domestic and overseas 
cybersecurity related trends, and dynamic ability to respond to through organic 
collaboration among the various functions distributed throughout related 
specialist organizations such as government institutions, independent 
administrative agencies and others. When implementing these changes, CSIRT 
functions, which serve as the point of contact for international incident handling 
within Japan, will also be considered.  
Based on the above, the NISC will be the "Cybersecurity Center" (tentative) 
                                                                                                                                                            
Center, IPA, JPCERT/CC for cooperation between CSIRT from various countries, and APCERT (Asia 
Pacific Computer Emergency Response Team) for cooperation between CSIRT in the Asia-Pacific region. 

 
54 
 
around FY2015 by preparing the required organizational structure, including 
authorities and securing of human resources through personnel management 
such as employment and cultivation of specialist personnel. 
The promotion of information sharing related to cyber attacks is necessary as 
a basis for the organic collaboration between relevant organizations including 
government institutions and critical infrastructure providers. On these occasions, 
a framework will be prepared to maintain confidentiality of information, in 
accordance with the purposes of sharing information, the details of the shared 
information, and the scope of the parties sharing the information while 
continuing to use existing frameworks as well.  
 
In order to ensure the appropriate implementation of the various measures 
implemented in accordance with this strategy, and to ensure organic 
collaboration between the measures, a management aimed at the achievement of 
the mid to long term goal of realizing a cybersecurity nation will be carried out, 
while, based on this strategy, the annual plans for each year starting from 
FY2013 and an international strategy on cybersecurity will be developed.  
In addition, in order to appropriately respond to domestic and overseas 
environmental changes and to maintain the continued improvement of this 
strategy, any measures based on this strategy and objectives management, 
evaluation for this strategy and the annual plans shall be carried out. During the 
evaluation, the progress of the various measures and others will be evaluated 
from a people's point of view.  
 

