 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
W ASHINGTON, D.C. 20503
October 30, 2015
Executive Summary
Strengthening the cybersecurity of Federal networks, systems, and data is one of the most 
important challenges we face as a Nation.  As a result, the Federal Government is bringing 
significant resources to bear to ensure cybersecurity remains a top priority.  This includes 
strengthening government-wide processes for developing, implementing, and institutionalizing 
best practices; developing and retaining the cybersecurity workforce; and working with public 
and private sector research and development communities to leverage the best of existing, new, 
and emerging technology.
In furthering this mission, the Federal Chief Information Officer (FCIO) initiated a 30-day 
Cybersecurity Sprint on June 12, 2015. The Cybersecurity Sprint Team (“Sprint Team”), led by 
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), was comprised of representatives from the 
National Security Council (NSC), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Department 
of Defense (DoD), and other Federal civilian and defense agencies. The initial Sprint memo 
instructed agencies to implement a number of immediate high priority actions to enhance the 
cybersecurity of Federal information and assets. This Cybersecurity Strategy and 
Implementation Plan (“CSIP”) is the result of the Cybersecurity Sprint, and incorporates 
progress reporting and corrective actions that are ongoing.
The CSIP is the result of a comprehensive review of the Federal Government’s cybersecurity 
policies, procedures, and practices by the Sprint Team. The goal was to identify and address 
critical cybersecurity gaps and emerging priorities, and make specific recommendations to 
address those gaps and priorities. The CSIP will strengthen Federal civilian cybersecurity 
through the following five objectives:

  
Page 2 of 21
 
1) Prioritized Identification and Protection of high value information and assets; 
2) Timely Detection of and Rapid Response to cyber incidents;
3) Rapid Recovery from incidents when they occur and Accelerated Adoption of lessons 
learned from the Sprint assessment;
4) Recruitment and Retention of the most highly-qualified Cybersecurity Workforce 
talent the Federal Government can bring to bear; and 
5) Efficient and Effective Acquisition and Deployment of Existing and Emerging 
Technology.  
The CSIP is organized in the following manner:  
x
Objectives: “What we need to achieve”
x
Actions: “How and where we focus our efforts to achieve those objectives”
Specifically, the CSIP’s key actions include:
x
All agencies will continue to identify their high value assets (HVAs) and critical system 
architecture in order to understand the potential impact to those assets from a cyber incident, 
and ensure robust physical and cybersecurity protections are in place. The identification of 
HVAs will be an ongoing activity due to the dynamic nature of cybersecurity risks.
x
DHS will accelerate the deployment of Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) and 
EINSTEIN capabilities to all participating Federal agencies to enhance detection of cyber 
vulnerabilities and protection from cyber threats.
x
All agencies will improve the identity and access management of user accounts on Federal 
information systems to drastically reduce vulnerabilities and successful intrusions.
x
OMB, in coordination with NSC and DHS, will issue incident response best practices for use 
by Federal agencies, incorporating lessons learned from past cyber incidents to ensure future 
incidents are mitigated in a consistent and timely manner.  The best practices will serve as a 
living document to be continuously updated.
x
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) will provide updated guidance to 
agencies on how to recover from cyber events.
x
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and OMB will initiate several new efforts to 
improve Federal cybersecurity workforce recruitment, hiring, and training and ensure a 
pipeline for future talent is put in place.
x
The Chief Information Officer (CIO) Council will create an Emerging Technology Sub-
Committee to facilitate efforts to rapidly deploy emerging technologies at Federal agencies.
x
The President’s Management Council (PMC) will oversee the implementation of the CSIP in 
recognition of the key role Deputy Secretaries play in managing cybersecurity within their 
agencies. 
x
CIOs and Chief Information Security Officers will also have direct responsibility and 
accountability for implementation of the CSIP, consistent with their role of ensuring the 
identification and protection of their agency’s critical systems and information.  

  
Page 3 of 21
 
The remainder of the CSIP outlines key actions, responsibilities, and timeframes for 
implementation. Progress will be tracked through several mechanisms, to include 
comprehensive reviews of agency-specific cybersecurity posture (CyberStats), the CIO Council,
and the Information Security and Identity Management Committee (ISIMC). The PMC will 
serve as the Executive Steering Committee and will oversee quarterly performance reviews to 
identify major performance gaps.

 
Page 4 of 21

 
 Page 5 of 21 
 
Introduction
Strengthening the cybersecurity of Federal networks, systems, and data is one of the most 
important challenges we face as a Nation. Every day, the Federal Government experiences 
increasingly sophisticated and persistent cyber threats. While the Federal Government has 
prioritized its efforts to address these threats, several fundamental challenges exist which hinder 
progress in eliminating cybersecurity risks.  Among these challenges is a broad surface area of 
legacy systems with thousands of different hardware and software configurations across the 
Federal Government, which introduces significant vulnerabilities and opportunities for 
exploitation.  Additionally, each agency is responsible for managing its own information 
technology systems, which, due to varying levels of cybersecurity expertise and capacity, 
generates inconsistencies in capability across government.
The Federal Government is bringing significant resources to bear to ensure cybersecurity 
remains a top priority and agencies are held accountable for improving their performance in this 
critical area.  These efforts include strengthening government-wide processes for developing,
implementing, and institutionalizing best practices; developing and retaining the cybersecurity 
workforce; and working with public and private sector research and development communities to 
leverage the best of existing, new, and emerging technology.
To ensure that Federal agencies are dedicating appropriate attention and resources to address 
these critical and pressing challenges, the FCIO initiated a Cybersecurity Sprint on June 12, 
2015.  The Cybersecurity Sprint required agencies to take immediate steps to further protect 
Federal information and assets and improve the resilience of Federal networks.  These actions 
included implementing strong user identity verification and authentication, patching critical 
vulnerabilities, scanning for cyber threat indicators, identifying critical information assets, and 
reviewing and reducing the number of privileged user accounts.  In addition to providing 
direction to agencies, the FCIO established a Sprint Team to lead a 30-day review of the Federal 
Government’s cybersecurity policies, procedures, and practices.  Accordingly, the FCIO tasked 
the Sprint Team with creating and operationalizing a set of action plans and strategies to further 
address critical cybersecurity priorities and recommend a Federal civilian cybersecurity strategy. 
The result of those recommendations is the CSIP.  
The CSIP directs a series of actions to improve capabilities for identifying and detecting
vulnerabilities and threats, enhance protections of government assets and information, and 
further develop robust response and recovery capabilities to ensure readiness and resilience when 
incidents inevitably occur.  The CSIP is part of a broader series of actions to bolster Federal 
civilian cybersecurity, which includes the issuance of updated guidance under the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (P.L. 113-283) (FISMA); revisions to the 
Federal Government’s governing document establishing policies for the management of Federal 
information resources: Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource; new 
guidance on implementing cybersecurity contracting language; cyber incident response best 
practices for use by Federal civilian agencies; the issuance of a blanket purchase agreement for 
Identity Protection Services designed to give Federal agencies ready access to best-in-class 
solutions and reduce wasteful and inefficient duplicative contracts for common-use services; and 
an updated Cybersecurity Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goal to improve Federal cybersecurity 
performance. 

 
 Page 6 of 21 
 
The CSIP emphasizes the need for a defense in depth1 approach that relies on the layering of 
people, processes, technologies, and operations to achieve more secure Federal information 
systems.  Inherent in a defense in depth approach is the recognition that all protection 
mechanisms have weaknesses that adversaries may exploit through several paths.  Implementing 
the CSIP will not prevent every cyber incident.  In fact, it is likely that agencies will discover 
additional and previously unknown malicious activity as they improve prevention and detection 
capabilities.  Accordingly, the CSIP incorporates procedures to prepare agencies to respond to 
and recover from incidents, secure Federal information and assets, and ultimately strengthen 
their overall security posture.
The CSIP incorporates feedback from public and private sector subject-matter experts as well as
lessons learned from current cyber incident response and recovery efforts affecting the Federal 
Government.  The CSIP builds on existing policy work, including the Comprehensive National 
Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI); Presidential Policy Directives; Executive Orders; legislation 
such as FISMA; OMB guidance; agency performance and incident data; and Federal Continuity 
Directives. The CSIP emphasizes the government-wide adherence to NIST standards and 
guidelines and builds on the core concepts of the Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity, which NIST developed in accordance with Executive Order 13636, 
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.
Oversight
Responsibility for Federal Government cybersecurity is distributed and shared by all agencies; 
however, specific agencies have additional roles in supporting this mission and ensuring that the 
Federal Government has the tools, resources, and guidance necessary to make the risk-based 
decisions necessary to secure their systems. FISMA states that OMB oversees Federal agency 
information security policies and practices.  The OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB 
Cyber) was created at the beginning of FY 20152 to strengthen Federal cybersecurity through:   
1) Data-driven, risk-based oversight of agency and government-wide cybersecurity 
programs;
2) Issuance and implementation of Federal policies to address emerging IT security risks;
and
3) Oversight of the government-wide response to major incidents and vulnerabilities to 
reduce their impact on the Federal Government. 
Progress on CSIP implementation will be tracked through several mechanisms, to include the 
PMC, comprehensive reviews of agency-specific cybersecurity posture (CyberStats), the CIO
Council and the ISIMC. The quarterly performance reviews will be used to identify major 
performance and policy gaps, which will be addressed through regular engagement with agency 
leadership and future FISMA guidance.  Additionally, OMB and NSC will work within the 
                                                           
1 NIST Special Publication 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, 
defines defense in depth as: “information security strategy integrating people, technology, and operations 
capabilities to establish variable barriers across multiple layers and missions of the organization.” 
2 OMB launched this dedicated unit within the Office of E-Government & Information Technology, also referred to 
as the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer, in the Fiscal Year 2014 Federal Information Security 
Management Act Report to Congress. 

 
 Page 7 of 21 
 
interagency to ensure government-wide input and engagement on the creation of usable, targeted 
policies and guidance to help agencies continue to strengthen their cybersecurity posture.
The CSIP will strengthen Federal civilian cybersecurity through the following five objectives:
1) Prioritized Identification and Protection of high value information and assets; 
2) Timely Detection of and Rapid Response to cyber incidents; 
3) Rapid Recovery from incidents when they occur and Accelerated Adoption of 
lessons learned from the Sprint assessment;
4) Recruitment and Retention of the most highly-qualified Cybersecurity Workforce 
talent the Federal Government can bring to bear; and 
5) Efficient and Effective Acquisition and Deployment of Existing and Emerging 
Technology.  
The CSIP implementation described herein is organized in the following manner:  
x
Objectives: “What we need to achieve”
x
Actions: “How and where we focus our efforts to achieve those objectives”

 
 Page 8 of 21 
 
I.
Objective 1: Prioritized Identification and Protection of High Value Information and 
Assets  
Identify
To protect Federal Government information and assets, agencies must first identify the value 
and impact of the information on their systems and networks.  Agencies must also identify 
the IT assets used to store, process, and transmit that information. Further, agencies must 
identify those assets and capabilities that enable mission essential functions and ensure 
delivery of critical services to the public.  
Accordingly, OMB directed agencies to initiate processes to identify their High Value Assets 
(HVAs) at the beginning of the Cybersecurity Sprint.  Agencies were to review and improve 
the security practices and controls around their HVAs. To assist agencies with this process, 
the Sprint Team developed a working definition of “high value asset”3 and a list of attributes 
to consider when determining whether an asset, dataset, or repository is of high value.  
Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 199, Standards for Security Categorization 
of Federal Information and Information Systems, also provides relevant guidance and 
requires Federal agencies to categorize their information and information systems to 
determine the worst-case adverse impact to operations and assets, individuals, other 
organizations, and the Nation if their information or systems are compromised.4 The effort 
to identify HVAs builds on FIPS 199 and seeks to implement lessons learned from cyber 
incidents involving personally identifiable information (PII), by asking agencies’ to give 
special consideration to the capability, intent, and specific targeting of high value data 
repositories by potential or actual adversaries.   
Going forward, OMB is directing the following actions to prioritize the identification and 
protection of high value information and assets:  
a.
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) will identify the appropriate interagency 
resources to lead a threat assessment of Federal HVAs that are at high-risk of targeting by 
adversaries by December 31, 2015.  DHS will simultaneously lead a team, augmented by 
DoD, the Intelligence Community (IC), and other agency resources as needed, to 
continuously diagnose and mitigate the cybersecurity protections around the HVAs 
identified during the Cybersecurity Sprint. The DHS-led team will continue to conduct 
proactive assessments on a rolling basis as the IC, law enforcement, and other Federal 
entities identify new threats.  DHS and DNI will share the results of these assessments 
with the agencies, as necessary.
                                                           
3 “High Value Assets” refer to those assets, systems, facilities, data and datasets that are of particular interest to 
potential adversaries.  These assets, systems, and datasets may contain sensitive controls, instructions or data used in 
critical Federal operations, or house unique collections of data (by size or content) making them of particular interest 
to criminal, politically-motivated, or state-sponsored actors for either direct exploitation of the data or to cause a loss 
of confidence in the U.S. Government.
4 FIPS Publication 199 defines three levels of potential impact (i.e., low, moderate, and high) on organizations or 
individuals should there be a breach of security (i.e., a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability). 

 
 Page 9 of 21 
 
i. To facilitate this process, OMB will establish a requirement in the Fiscal Year 
2015-2016 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy Management 
Requirements 5 for civilian agencies to identify and submit their list of HVAs to 
DHS for assessment.
ii. Agency leadership will direct their respective CIOs to engage and collaborate 
with DHS during these HVA assessments.  
iii. To identify HVAs containing PII, the Senior Agency Official for Privacy for each 
agency shall initiate a review of their information technology systems that 
maintain PII.  The Senior Agency Official for Privacy shall evaluate the 
sensitivity and quantity of the PII and recommend to the CIO and agency head, as 
appropriate, whether a specific system or systems should be added to the agency’s 
list of HVAs.
iv. In addition, for each HVA and information technology asset identified, the Senior 
Agency Official for Privacy shall review the processes for protecting PII on the 
systems and ensure that the applicable Privacy Act systems of records notice(s)
and privacy impact assessment(s) that covers a given HVA or information 
technology asset is current, accurately addresses risks to PII, and includes any
steps taken to mitigate those risks.
b. Per OMB M-14-03, Enhancing the Security of Federal Information and Information 
Systems and OMB M-15-01, Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Guidance on Improving Federal 
Information Security and Privacy Management Practices, Federal agencies must 
accelerate the implementation of capabilities and tools to identify risks to their systems 
and networks, to include, but not limited to, DHS’s CDM program. CDM addresses parts 
of each stated objective of the CSIP, and its implementation is fundamental to helping 
agencies develop a better understanding of the risks to their IT systems and networks 
through improved identification and detection of cyber threats.  Through CDM Phase 1, 
DHS is deploying sensors and tools at agencies that will provide a more accurate picture 
of:  1) the inventory of hardware and software assets under management, and 2) the 
ongoing security posture of each of those assets.  DHS purchased CDM Phase 1 tools and 
integration services for all participating agencies in FY 2015. Implementation of these 
tools will result in coverage for all Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Act agencies and over 
97% of the Federal Civilian Government. 
c.
During the Cybersecurity Sprint, DHS identified the need to accelerate CDM 
implementation throughout Federal agencies and has since developed a plan to accelerate 
the deployment of CDM Phase 2.  In the first quarter of FY 2016, DHS has begun
purchasing tools to provide Phase 2 capabilities for participating agencies.  This 
capability will help ensure all employees and contractors at covered agencies are using 
appropriately secure methods to access Federal systems.  DHS is scheduled to provide 
Federal agencies with additional Phase 2 capabilities throughout FY 2016, with the full 
suite of CDM Phase 2 capabilities delivered by the end of FY 2016.
                                                           
5 This guidance will be issued concurrent with the CSIP. The guidance is referred to as the “FY 2016 FISMA 
Guidance” hereafter in this document. 

 
 Page 10 of 21 
 
Protect
Over the course of the Cybersecurity Sprint, Federal civilian agencies increased their overall 
use of strong authentication from 42 percent to 72 percent.  Specifically, Federal civilian 
agencies increased use of strong authentication for privileged users from 33 percent to nearly 
75 percent.  Although there is no single method by which all cyber incidents can be 
prevented, improving the access management of user accounts on Federal information 
systems could drastically reduce current vulnerabilities. Privileged user accounts are a 
known target for malicious actors but can be protected by an existing, strong authentication 
solution: Personal Identity Verification (PIV) credentials. Implementing strong 
authentication PIV credentials, as directed in Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12: 
Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors
(HSPD-12) and Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 201-2: Personal Identity 
Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors, is a cost-effective and immediate 
action that agencies should take to drastically reduce their risk profiles.  PIV credentials 
efficiently authenticate an employee’s identity and reduce the risk of identity fraud,
tampering, counterfeiting, and exploitation. 
To build on the strong authentication progress made during the Cybersecurity Sprint, in FY 
2016 Federal agencies should continue to target the Administration Cybersecurity CAP goal 
of 100% strong authentication for all privileged users and 85% strong authentication for 
unprivileged users.  While impressive strides have been made in areas such as strong 
authentication implementation, there is still more work to do.  For example, once agencies
have identified and inventoried their HVAs and high value information technology systems, 
they must protect them with a variety of policies, processes, and tools, consistent with 
applicable OMB guidance and NIST standards. Effective protection activities can include 
reducing the attack surface and complexity of IT infrastructure; minimizing the use of 
administrative privileges; utilizing strong authentication credentials; safeguarding data at rest 
and in-transit; training personnel; ensuring repeatable processes and procedures; adopting 
innovative and modern technology; ensuring strict domain separation of critical/sensitive 
information and information systems; and ensuring a current inventory of hardware and 
software components.
Furthermore, the employment of shared services is a proven approach for providing agencies 
with access to robust capabilities and can result in improved consistency and security across 
the Federal Government.  They can also encourage the common application of standardized 
best practices, reduce costs and increases efficiencies. The Cybersecurity Sprint Team 
performed a Federal-wide inventory and assessment of current cyber-focused shared 
services.  The Sprint Team assessed the maturity and effectiveness of these offerings, 
identified service gaps, and proposed additional offerings to address critical needs. 
The CSIP initiates the following protection activities to improve Federal cybersecurity.  
These actions are in addition to those already being undertaken by Federal agencies and do 
not preclude agencies from continuing complementary work to secure their systems.

 
 Page 11 of 21 
 
a.
Tighten privileged user policies, practices, and procedures. 
i. The Cybersecurity Sprint Team required agencies to immediately review policies 
and practices for privileged users.  Agencies should continue to: 
x
inventory and validate privileged account scope and numbers;
x
minimize the number of privileged users; 
x
limit functions that can be performed when using privileged accounts; 
x
limit the duration that privileged users can be logged in; 
x
limit the privileged functions that can be performed using remote access; and
x
ensure that privileged user activities are logged and regularly reviewed.
b. Complete PIV implementation for all employees and contractors6 required to obtain a 
PIV.
i. The Cybersecurity Sprint directed agencies to immediately implement PIV for the 
following targets:
x
100% of privileged users.7
x
75% of non-privileged users.8
a.
The CAP Goal for FY 2016 Q1 is 85% of non-privileged users.
ii. To facilitate this process, the Cybersecurity Sprint Team developed a compilation 
of best practices for PIV implementation and posted the collection on the CIO 
Council’s Knowledge Portal.
iii. Where necessary, GSA, in coordination with OMB, DHS, and DOD, and in 
consultation with NIST, will deploy technical resources for defined periods to 
assist agencies with remaining PIV implementation challenges.  
iv. The CSIP directs NIST to publish best practices for privileged user PIV 
implementation based on lessons learned from the Sprint within 30 days.9
v. OPM, in coordination with NIST, OMB, and GSA, will update guidance on 
foreign nationals with regards to HSPD-12 applicability by December 31, 2015.
c.
Address all critical vulnerabilities10 and scan for Indicators of Compromise.
i. Moving forward and on a rolling basis, the CSIP requires agencies to scan for 
indicators of compromise within 24 hours of receipt of the indicators from DHS. 
                                                           
6 As defined by OMB Memorandum M-05-24: Implementation of Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) 
12 – Policy for Common Identification Standards for Federal Employees and Contractors.
7 A network account with elevated privileges which is typically allocated to system administrators, network 
administrators, DBAs, and others who are responsible for system/application control, monitoring, or administration 
functions. – 2015 FISMA Metrics
8 An unprivileged network account is any account that is not a privileged network account. – 2015 FISMA Metrics
9 All instances of “within X days” in the CSIP means the deadline for the action is “within X days of the CSIP’s
issuance.” 
10 The DHS National Cybersecurity Assessments and Technical Services (NCATS) team identifies critical 
vulnerabilities at agencies and assigns a severity score based on an industry-standard scoring model. For further 
questions contact ncats_info@hq.dhs.gov.   

 
 Page 12 of 21 
 
ii. Consistent with DHS’s Binding Operational Directive 15-01, Critical 
Vulnerability Mitigation Requirements for Federal Civilian Executive Branch 
Departments’ and Agencies’ Internet-Accessible Systems, the CSIP directs 
agencies to patch all critical vulnerabilities immediately or, at a minimum, within 
30 days of patch release. Vulnerabilities existing longer than 30 days will be 
included in agency PMC reports.
d. NSC and OMB will release the EO 13681, Improving the Security of Consumer Financial 
Transactions Implementation Plan by December 31, 2015, to require implementation of 
strong authentication and effective identity proofing for government digital services that 
make personal data accessible to citizens online.
e.
Drawing on the work of the Sprint Team, OMB will release a plan for implementing new 
cybersecurity shared services within 3 months.  These services will augment or 
supplement existing agency services, while providing new services for agencies without 
existing capabilities.  Potential service offerings could include, but are not limited to: 
i. Identity, Authentication, and Authorization Services:
x
Agencies’ ability to further their mission and achieve efficiencies by placing 
high value services online requires them to be able to have confidence in the
identities of users accessing these services. This set of shared identity 
services could enable agencies to access digital credentials based on effective 
identity proofing methodologies and user-friendly strong authentication 
technologies. In addition, agencies can obtain validated information to 
support authorization decisions so that appropriate users can access their
resources or benefits.  
ii. Mobile Security Services:
x
Mobile devices have become as powerful and connected as desktop and laptop 
computers, requiring the same level of attention to cybersecurity. Mobile 
security has unique challenges that require different solutions than existing 
programs offer. This service (or services) could address authentication, 
application management, device management, and encryption, and may 
include approved tools, best practices, and implementation support.  
iii. Network Segmentation Services:
x
Effective network segmentation management requires consistent application 
of best practices to limit lateral movement across networks.  This shared 
service could provide network segmentation shared service capabilities across 
the Federal Government to help ensure that agencies consistently apply best 
practices to this complex management task. If operationalized, all Federal
organizations would be asked to provide recommendations to the network 
segmentation services management offering to guide the proper 
implementation of network segmentation within an organization.
iv. Digital Rights Management: 
x
A digital rights management (DRM) shared service capability could enable a 
systematic approach to data-level protection across the Federal Government 

 
 Page 13 of 21 
 
and help prevent unauthorized review, redistribution, and modification of 
sensitive Government information. While protections at the network level 
remain essential, adding protection at the data level is critical to achieving
defense in depth.
v. Encryption Services:
x
Encryption as a shared service could help ensure consistent application of 
security policies and potentially provide delivery of a range of cryptographic 
capabilities.  If operationalized, this shared service could also leverage, and 
may require updates to the existing Federal Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
Proposals for this service offering may also include new requirements for 
employing web encryption (HTTPS), digitally signed email, and default 
encryption for sensitive information held by Federal civilian agencies. 

 
 Page 14 of 21 
 
II.
Objective 2: Timely Detection of and Rapid Response to Cyber Incidents
Detect
The Sprint Team found that Federal civilian agency threat-detection capabilities have 
improved significantly in recent years.  With DHS’s EINSTEIN program providing network 
perimeter protection and the CDM program providing ongoing awareness of assets and 
activities within the network, agencies deploying these capabilities are now in a stronger 
position.  Agencies have also made great strides in their efforts to share and receive cyber 
threat information, both with other agencies and the private sector, which allows network 
defenders to detect and block cyber intrusions before they cause damage.  This section of the 
CSIP identifies further improvements that OMB, DHS, and Federal agencies will take to 
enhance information sharing efforts, detect cyber threats in real time, and rapidly respond to 
cyber incidents.   
a.
For agencies to deploy strong perimeter protections, DHS will build on the current 
EINSTEIN platform to implement advanced protections beyond the current signature-
based approach.  DHS has initiated the following efforts to advance the EINSTEIN 
program: 
i. DHS is piloting behavioral-based analytics to extend beyond the current approach 
of using known signatures and begin identifying threat activity that takes
advantage of zero-day cyber intrusion methods.  DHS is examining technologies 
from the private sector to evolve to this next stage of network defense. DHS will 
share lessons learned from the pilot study and next steps with OMB by March 
31, 2016.
ii. DHS has issued a contract action that will provide EINSTEIN 3A protections to 
participating agencies that are not covered by the ISPs currently under contract.  
This contract will make certain EINSTEIN 3A protections (e-mail and domain 
name system) available to all Federal Civilian Government agencies by
December 31, 2015.
b. Agencies rely on protections deployed through their trusted internet connection (TIC) or 
Managed Trusted Internet Protocol Services (MTIPS) providers.  OMB Cyber, in 
coordination with DHS, will initiate a 30-day review of current TIC architecture and 
baseline controls upon release of the CSIP with a focus on:
i. Continuous agency review of their public-facing Internet connections for 
consolidation and reduction.
ii. Ensuring all possible traffic, including mobile and cloud, goes through a TIC.
iii. Options for where TICs can be hosted to improve bandwidth coverage.
iv. Additional tools that can be implemented at a TIC location.
v. How external vendors who store, process, and transmit agency data for or on 
behalf of the government can have their traffic securely encapsulated within the 
TIC connectivity.  
c.
The CSIP emphasizes ways to advance Federal-wide information sharing on critical 
vulnerabilities and threats, indicators of compromise, and best practices.  Information 
sharing is essential not only for detecting and blocking intrusions on a specific targeted 

 
 Page 15 of 21 
 
organization, but for understanding the broader landscape of cyber risk. DHS analyzes 
cybersecurity information from sensors deployed across the Federal Government and 
from incidents reported by Federal agencies and the private sector. With this 
information, DHS is able to identify when adversaries appear to be targeting particular 
sectors or types of organizations and share the information proactively, helping agencies 
understand emerging risks and develop effective protective measures to block threats 
before incidents occur.
i. One primary barrier to effective information sharing is a lack of operational 
speed. Information sharing must be sufficiently rapid to detect and block threats 
before targeted networks are adversely impacted. The DHS National 
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) has developed 
an automated system to share cyber threat indicators in near real-time and is 
working aggressively to build this capability across government and out to the 
private sector.  The CSIP directs all CFO Act agencies to work with DHS to 
implement automated indicator sharing by developing their own capability, 
procuring commercially available solutions, or participating in a shared service, 
once available, within 12 months.
d. Beginning in FY 2016, GSA will develop a Business Due Diligence Information Service 
that will provide agencies with a common government-wide capability for identifying, 
assessing, and managing cyber and supply chain risk throughout the acquisition process.    
Respond
The Sprint Team identified several common challenges during the Cybersecurity Sprint and 
determined that Federal Civilian Government cyber incident response procedures and practices 
are not consistently documented or implemented. As instances of cyber incidents simultaneously 
affecting multiple Federal agencies are likely to increase, the Federal Government requires 
streamlined response efforts and enhanced procedures for communication and coordination. The 
CSIP aims to address these challenges through the creation of incident response best practices for 
Federal civilian agencies. This new guidance will help set expectations across all involved 
parties and ensure consistency across incident response efforts while remaining flexible enough 
to guide activities under various conditions and situations. 
The CSIP addresses this challenge by initiating the following actions: 
a.
OMB, in coordination with NSC and DHS, will provide Federal civilian agencies with
incident response best practices along with the FY 2016 FISMA Guidance, which will be 
issued concurrent with the CSIP, to provide a reference guide for responding to major 
incidents11 affecting Federal civilian agencies. The best practices will address several 
common challenges identified during the Sprint by formalizing the role of an on-scene 
coordinator, assigning incident response work streams, and establishing entry and exit 
criteria for the response phase. Furthermore, the best practices will clarify existing 
requirements for agencies to notify US-CERT, Congress, and victims of a cyber incident;
                                                           
11 For a definition of major incidents, please see the FISMA FY 2016 Guidance. 

 
 Page 16 of 21 
 
will help improve agency plans and procedures to ensure that relevant authorities are 
documented and understood; and will enhance inter-agency communication and 
coordination procedures to ensure incidents are mitigated appropriately and in a timely 
manner.
b. In the FY 2016 FISMA Guidance, OMB will require that all departments and agencies 
(not bureaus or components) designate one principal Security Operations Center (SOC), 
or equivalent organization to be accountable to agency leadership, DHS, and OMB for all 
incident response activities. Agencies will provide this information to US-CERT by 
November 13, 2015.
c.
Separately, within 3 months, OMB, in coordination with DHS, will provide agencies 
with best practices and use cases for Federal SOCs to ensure consistent roles,
responsibilities, policies, and procedures are employed by SOCs across the Federal 
Government.
d. In the FY 2016 FISMA Guidance, OMB will require agencies to have a standing Federal 
Network Authorization with DHS to ensure DHS can rapidly deploy on-site resources to 
conduct incident response activities, when necessary. The authorization should be 
reviewed on a semi-annual basis and remain on file with DHS. 
e.
The CSIP directs GSA, in coordination with OMB, to research contract vehicle options 
and develop a capability to deploy incident response services that can quickly be 
leveraged by Federal agencies, on a reimbursable basis. The incident response service 
will be managed by the contracting agency, in coordination with DHS and OMB. GSA 
will develop requirements and deliver a detailed implementation plan for this task to 
OMB within 3 months; then complete the acquisition process and deliver the final 
capability within 6 months.

 
 Page 17 of 21 
 
III.
Objective 3: Rapid Recovery From Incidents When They Occur and Accelerated 
Adoption of Lessons Learned From The Sprint Assessment
Recovery
The CSIP defines “recover” as the development and implementation of plans, processes, and 
procedures for recovery and full restoration, in a timely manner, of any capabilities or 
services that are impaired due to a cyber event.  The Cybersecurity Sprint identified that 
Federal-wide and agency-specific policies and practices for recovering from cyber events are 
inconsistent and vary in degree of maturity.  In recent years, the Federal Government has 
prioritized protecting its assets and detecting threats.  As an increasing number of threats are 
detected, the Federal Government must begin to improve both its response and recovery 
capabilities.  Recent events have demonstrated the need for policies or plans related to 
recovery from cyber events to remain flexible to better allow agencies to respond to and 
recover from evolving and sophisticated threats.
To date, there have been a number of Federal-wide policies and standards that provide 
guidance as to how agencies should recover from cyber events.  For example, the NIST 
Cybersecurity Framework for Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity identifies “Recover”,
which includes the sub-categories of Recovery Planning, Improvements, and 
Communications, as one of its primary Functions.  Additionally, numerous controls within 
NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 4 address elements of recovery controls and 
capabilities that agencies should address.  OMB also published OMB M-07-16:  
Safeguarding Against and Responding to the Breach of Personally Identifiable Information,
which provides guidance to agencies as to how they should protect against data breaches and 
respond and recover when one occurs.  Despite the existence of available standards and 
guidance, there remains room for improvement. 
The CSIP initiates the following actions to help agencies rapidly recover from incidents
when they occur and accelerate adoption of lessons learned from these events.    
a.
The CSIP directs NIST to provide guidance to agencies by June 30, 2016, on how to 
recover from a cyber event, focusing on potential scenarios to include, but not limited to,
a data breach or a destructive malware campaign.
b. The CSIP directs OMB to update OMB M-07-16 by March 31, 2016, to reflect current 
best practices and recent lessons learned regarding privacy protections and data breach 
standards.  This updated guidance regarding the collection and disposal of PII will help 
agencies ensure compliance with relevant laws and regulations for the protection of this 
sensitive information. 
c.
To complement these efforts, the CSIP also directs OPM within 3 months to review 
options and develop and deliver to OMB recommendations for making Identity 
Protection Services a standard Federal employee benefit.

 
 Page 18 of 21 
 
IV.
Objective 4: Recruitment and Retention of the Most Highly-Qualified Cybersecurity 
Workforce Talent the Federal Government Can Bring to Bear 
Human Resources
Strengthening Federal cybersecurity is not possible without the appropriate talent. The
Federal workforce must keep pace with the growing dependence on technology for mission 
essential activities.  A well-functioning security organization requires a blend of technical, 
policy, legal, and leadership resources covering multiple disciplines within cybersecurity.  A 
focus on any one skillset without an understanding of overall organizational needs can lead to 
failure.  The Cybersecurity Sprint identified two key observations related to the Federal 
cybersecurity workforce:  1) the vast majority of Federal agencies cite a lack of cyber and IT 
talent as a major resource constraint that impacts their ability to protect information and 
assets; and 2) there are a number of existing Federal initiatives to address this challenge, but 
implementation and awareness of these programs is inconsistent.  The CSIP initiates the 
following actions to address these challenges in recruiting and retaining a high-quality 
cybersecurity workforce.  These initiatives will inform a broader Cybersecurity Human 
Resources Strategy to be published by OMB within 6 months, which will help ensure the 
Federal Government can recruit, develop, and maintain a pipeline of cybersecurity talent 
throughout the Federal Government.
a.
The CSIP directs all agencies to participate in the following efforts:
i. OPM and OMB will compile existing Special Hiring Authorities (by agency) that 
can be used to hire cybersecurity and IT professionals across government. OPM 
will clarify legal guidelines and provide guidance to agencies on how to increase 
the understanding of these Special Hiring Authorities, and how agencies should 
work with their human resources departments to implement them, where 
appropriate, and rapidly close talent gaps and accelerate hiring by December 31,
2015.
ii. Agencies will participate in OPM’s existing Special Cyber Workforce Project,
which provides cybersecurity job codes by specialty, so that agency leadership 
can identify the universe of their cyber talent, understand Federal-wide challenges 
for retaining talent, and address gaps accordingly.  Agency CIOs, working 
collaboratively with Chief Human Capital Officers, should use this assessment to 
identify their top five cyber talent gaps, which will be due to OPM and OMB by 
December 31, 2015.
b. The CSIP directs DHS to begin piloting their Automated Cybersecurity Position 
Description Hiring Tool across the Federal Government.  DHS is also directed to develop 
and report on performance and adoption metrics so that agency leadership can better 
understand how to leverage the tool. Used in concert with relevant OPM Position 
Classification Standards, the tool will assist in the implementation of the National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Framework by consistently mapping the 
NICE job codes according to selected skills and KSAs (Knowledge, Skills and Abilities). 
The tool enhances cybersecurity workforce recruitment by decreasing the applicant time-

 
 Page 19 of 21 
 
to-hire and by ensuring cybersecurity job announcements contain clear, technical content.
DHS must also post their own internal Cyber Workforce Analysis results on the CIO 
Council Knowledge Portal by November 30, 2015, as a best practice for other agencies 
to leverage. 
c.
The CSIP directs OPM, DHS, and OMB, in coordination with NIST and other NICE
partner agencies, to map the entire cyber workforce landscape across all agencies using 
the NICE National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework and identify cyber talent gaps 
and recommendations for closing them within 6 months. The mapping exercise and 
recommendation report should focus on:
i. Existing employees and open positions, starting with the civilian agencies, this 
assessment should also consider contractor resources.
ii. Existing resources and open positions within the DoD and the IC, this assessment 
should also consider contractor resources.
iii. Changes to human resources processes and systems that not only incorporate best 
practices for retaining and incentivizing employees, but simplify and expedite the 
hiring process.
iv. Capacity building actions to assist human resource professionals in their efforts to
implement CSIP recommendations.
v. Training and professional development opportunities for the existing workforce in 
order to address critical needs.
vi. Leveraging the National Science Foundation CyberCorps® Scholarship for 
Service and the Advanced Technological Education program to help inform
potential educational programs to help develop a pipeline of students from 
colleges, universities, and other providers.
vii. Driving awareness of cybersecurity internship opportunities and programs that 
establish the possibility of hiring participants into permanent positions.
viii. Creating and deploying “Tiger Teams” comprised of subject matter experts from 
across the Government to address critical workforce needs.
d. The CSIP also directs OPM, DHS, and OMB, in coordination with NIST and other NICE 
partner agencies, to develop recommendations for Federal workforce training and 
professional development in functional areas outside of cybersecurity and information 
technology that support cybersecurity efforts within 6 months.  These recommendations 
should address, at a minimum, the following functional areas: legal counsel, budget, 
procurement, privacy, and civil rights and liberties.

 
 Page 20 of 21 
 
V.
Objective 5: Efficient and Effective Acquisition and Deployment of Existing and 
Emerging Technology
Existing/Emerging Technology
As stated above, the CSIP acknowledges the need for a defense in depth approach, or a 
layering of people, processes, procedures, and tools, to achieve a more secure Federal 
landscape.  This section describes the steps the Federal Government must take to provide 
agencies with the appropriate technological toolset to adequately secure the functions, 
systems, and information enabling their missions.  The Cybersecurity Sprint Team observed 
that the Federal Government has made strides in the incubation and adoption of emerging 
technology for cybersecurity purposes through innovation and incubator programs, to include
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Information Innovation Office (I2O), the 
DHS Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency (HSARPA), in particular the 
Transition to Practice (TTP) program, and the NSF Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace 
(SaTC) Transition to Practice (TTP) program.  Furthermore, Federal agencies have adopted 
existing commercially available off-the-shelf (COTS) technology through programs like 
EINSTEIN and CDM.  In addition to these incubators, the NIST National Cybersecurity 
Center of Excellence (NCCoE) is a public-private partnership that fosters innovation and 
accelerates the adoption of secure technologies for the public and private sectors.
However, the connection between these programs and the agencies in need of existing and 
emerging technology must be strengthened.  The Cybersecurity Sprint identified a need for a 
Federal-wide technology assessment followed by a comprehensive program to assist agencies 
with the procurement, assessment, certification and accreditation of existing and emerging 
technology.  The CSIP initiates the following actions to address the challenge of acquisition 
and deployment of existing and emerging technology:
a.
OMB, in coordination with NSC, and OSTP, will convene a working group comprising 
representatives, as appropriate, from DHS, GSA, NIST, DOD, and the CIO Council, to 
develop recommendations for strengthening and better coordinating the collective ability 
of Federal civilian departments and agencies to identify, acquire, and rapidly implement 
innovative commercially-available cybersecurity products and services. The working 
group will deliver its recommendations to the Federal CIO and NSC Coordinator for 
Cybersecurity by March 31, 2016.
b. The CSIP directs GSA to develop a procurement capability to allow Federal agencies to 
access the technology at any known Federal technology incubator, to include, but not 
limited to, the NCCoE, I2O, and DHS HSARPA by December 31, 2015.
c.
The CSIP directs the Federal CIO Council to create an Emerging Technology Sub-
Committee under the ISIMC by December 31, 2015 that will be responsible for 
facilitating efforts to expediently deploy emerging technologies at Federal agencies.  This 
group will provide requirements, challenges, and feedback to both incubators and 
agencies. 

 
 Page 21 of 21 
 
d. The CSIP directs GSA and DOE, in coordination with the Federal CIO Council, DOD, 
ODNI, DHS, and the NCCoE, to establish a working group that will identify and connect 
current testing environments for new technology solutions and submit recommendations 
for establishing new testing environment solutions to OMB no later than December 31,
2015. Additionally, GSA will establish formal protocols for agencies to utilize these 
shared testing capabilities and share results broadly for promising technology solutions 
with potentially broad applicability.
e.
The CSIP directs the DHS CDM Program to work with the NCCoE to develop solutions 
and guidance related to CDM including providing technical guidance, best practices, 
sample implementation plans, and capability assessment methodologies within 2
months.
f.
The CSIP directs the NCCoE, in addition to their existing priorities, to focus on derived 
credentials solutions and other strong authentication solutions for mobile devices as a 
critical component of a broader effort to improve mobile device management.
 

