Government Decision 1838/2018 (XII.28.)
on the Strategy for the security of network and information systems in Hungary

The Government

1. adopts the Strategy for the security of network and information systems in Hungary
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Strategy’);

2. calls on the Minister of Interior to prepare an action plan with the involvement of the
ministers concerned, to implement the measures under points | to 56 in the Strategy.

Responsible: Minister of Interior

ministers concerned

Deadline: 31 Marc 2019

3. This decision shall enter into force on the day following of its promulgation.

Viktor Orban signed,
prime minister

The Strategy for the security of network and information systems

The explosion of information and communication technology (ICT) is bringing significant
changes in all areas of society. The Government adopted and announced the National ICT
Strategy in 2014, which aimed to develop the complete domestic digital environment on four
pillars (digital infrastructure, digital economy, digital state, digital skills).

The modern state, all its organizations and citizens are necessarily becoming users of a wider
range of the increasingly complex electronic infrastructures, the electronic information systems.
However, besides the benefits of dynamic development of the opportunities of information
society, the increase in abuses, attacks and threats is also a serious challenge in almost all areas.
A series of tasks needs to be solved not only for the purpose of following the development of
technology, but at the same time also in terms of the various aspects of security and threats.
Information and communication technology and devices offer opportunities in all areas of
development and innovation, however they also provide an opportunity for terrorism and
cybercrime. The wider the scope of these possibilities is, the more energy and attention the
security and protection issues require.

The implementation of an innovative and secure cyberspace is a common interest, a common
task of cyber security professionals, public- and market actors as well as citizens.

The Strategy for the security of network and information systems (hereinafter referred to as
‘Strategy’) covers Hungary, aims to create a free, secure and innovative cyberspace, to increase
Hungary's competitiveness, to introduce and adapt innovations, new technological solutions in
digitalized public administration, governmental and economic areas in a safe way, to create a
more secure e-government system, to develop public services in an innovative way, as well as
to raise cyber security and awareness, the level of preparedness in all areas of society.

The Strategy is considered a policy strategy under the provisions governing strategy-making
pursuant to Government Decree 38/2012 (III.12.) on government strategic governance.


Background, connections

In the changed national and international environment as a result of the cyberspace’s coming
into being, the Government Decision 1139/2013 (III.21.) on the National Cyber Security
Strategy of Hungary (hereinafter referred to as ‘National Cyber Security Strategy’) emphasizes
the importance of creating and ensuring cyber security and states that Hungary undertakes to
carry out tasks related to the protection of cyberspace with responsibility.

The basic purpose of the National Cyber Security Strategy is to ensure the development of a
free, secure and innovative cyberspace by creating the cornerstones of information security and
using, further developing existing tools, organizations and knowledge; to this end, it set
important and fundamental goals, namely:

a) establishing an organizational system and coordination under government responsibility,
b) enhancing international cooperation,

c) developing shared public-private responsibility,

d) encouraging education and research and development programs,

e) raising awareness,

f) strengthening the role of child protection.

First in 2013, the National Cyber Security Strategy defined the decisive role of the Hungarian
cyberspace in economic and societal life, as part of the global cyberspace. Along the National
Cyber Security Strategy, with view of the threats coming from cyberspace and the risks
involved, the preparation of Hungarian legal regulations began with the collaboration of
governmental, market and social actors. Act L of 2013 on the electronic information security
of state and municipal bodies (hereinafter referred to as ‘Hungarian Cyber Security Act’)
adopted with the National Cyber Security Strategy and amended several times since then,
created the legal environment which facilitated the establishment and consolidation of state
organizations in the field of cyber security primarily with regard to state, administrative
electronic information systems.

The Information Security Strategy Committee, which was established in early 2017 by the
National Cyber Security Center as organizer and by involving IT security experts, set out
guidelines for the purposes of the new strategy taking into account the available analyses and
the situation assessment and SWOT analysis formulated in the Digital Welfare Program.

The Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016
concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems
across the Union (NIS Directive) was published in the Official Journal of the European Union
on 19 July 2016, which is the first piece of legislation at Community level in the field of
information security, and which lays down rules and mandatory cooperation for certain
institutions on a mandatory and geopolitical basis. The NIS Directive imposes an obligation on
EU Member States to draw up a strategy in line with its provisions.

While drawing up the Strategy, the protection of network and information systems needs to be
strengthened by maintaining the values stated in the National Cyber Security Strategy, building
on its results, but responding to new challenges and threats, identifying new opportunities and
goals in order to meet the challenges of the modern age in all aspects.

The Strategy functions supplemented with the declaration regarding ‘Information security and
cyber security’ by the Government Decision 1456/2017 (VII.19.) on the 2016 monitoring report
of the National ICT Strategy, the Digital Prosperity Program 2.0, namely an extension of the


Digital Prosperity Program, the adoption of its work plan for 2017-2018, further developments
in digital infrastructure, competencies, the economy and public administration (hereinafter
referred to as ‘Digital Prosperity Program 2.0’), identifies with its content and develops in
parallel. Both documents promote the achievement of Hungary's cyber security interests and
goals by setting out those national goals, directions, tasks and instruments, on the basis of which
Hungary can enforce its national interests in cyberspace.

The complex system of the Digital Prosperity Program 2.0 aims to optimize the societal and
economic impact of digitalization in order to maximize its benefits in all areas of society and
economy.

Legislation, connections to domestic strategies

This Strategy:

a) reflects the basic values formulated in the Fundamental Law (freedom, security, rule of
law, international and European cooperation);

b) treats the internationally accepted principles formulated in the 2001 Budapest Convention
(‘Convention on Cybercrime’) as a basis;

c) is in line with the NATO’s Strategic Concept adopted in November 2010, the
Organization’s Cyber Security Policy adopted in June 2011 and its implementation plan,
as well as with the cyber security principles and purposes of the Organization as set out in
the documents of the NATO Summit in Lisbon on 19-20 November 2010 and in Chicago
on 20-21 May 2012, as well as the 2016 NATO Summit in Warsaw;

d) is in line with the Joint Communication of the European Commission and the High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union of 7
February 2013 entitled ‘Cyber Security Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Secure
and Reliable Cyberspace’;

e) contributes to the domestic implementation of the NIS Directive;

f) is in line with the information security purposes of the Act L of 2013 on the electronic
information security of state and municipal bodies, and with the organizational structure
laid down by the act;

g) takes into account the provisions governing strategy-making in Government Decree
38/2012 (III.12.) on government strategic governance;

h) details the responses to the challenges outlined in point 31 of the National Security Strategy
of Hungary adopted by the Government Decision 1035/2012 (21 February);

i) responds the challenges outlined in points 33, 52 and 82 of Government Decision
1656/2012 (XII.20.) on the adoption of the National Military Strategy of Hungary;

j) _ is line with the information security purposes for 2014-2020 outlined in the National ICT
Strategy of Hungary adopted by Government Decision 1069/2014 (IL.19.);

k) __ uses the status assessments of the 2016 monitoring report of the National ICT Strategy and
the Digital Welfare Program 2.0;

1) integrates the security goals outlined in the Digital Child Protection Strategy of Hungary
established within the framework of the Digital Welfare Program, in Hungary's Digital
Export Development Strategy and in Hungary's Digital Education Strategy (Digital
Education Strategy, 2017).

The sectoral legislation and normative acts governing public organisations covered by the
Strategy are the following:
1. the Act CVII of 2001 on certain aspects of electronic commerce services and information


society services

2. the Act CLXVI of 2012 on the identification, designation and protection of critical systems
and facilities

3. the Act CCXXII of 2015 on general rules for electronic administration and trust services

4. the Act L of 2013 on the electronic information security of state and municipal bodies

5. the Government Decree 65/2013 (III.8.) on the implementation of Act CLXVI of 2012 on
the identification, designation and protection of critical infrastructures and facilities

6. the Government Decree 360/2013 (X.11.) on the identification, designation and protection
of critical energy systems and facilities

7. the Government Decree 541/2013 (XII.30.) on the identification, designation and
protection of critical water management infrastructures and hydraulic establishments

8. the Government Decree 185/2015 (VII.13.) on the functions and powers of Government
incident response center and incident response centers, and the rules for security incident
response and technical investigation of security incidents, and for conducting vulnerability
testing

9. the Government Decree 187/2015 (VII.13.) on the functions and powers of the authority
responsible for the supervision of electronic information systems security and the
information security supervisor, as well as on the definition of closed electronic
information systems

10. the Government Decree 246/2015 (IX.8.) on the identification, designation and protection
of systems and facilities in healthcare

11. the Government Decree 330/2015 (X1.30.) on the identification, designation and protection
of critical systems and facilities of the financial sector

12. the Government Decree 249/2017 (IX.5.) on the identification, designation and protection
of critical systems and facilities of the information and communication technology sector

13. the Government Decree 410/2017 (XII.15.) on digital service providers

14. the Decree 41/2015 (VII.15.) of the Minister of Interior on the requirements relating to the
technological security and secure information devices and products, and to the security
classification and declaration of security levels determined in the Act L of 2013 on the
electronic information security of state and municipal bodies

15. the Government Decision 1233/2018 (IV.25.) on providing the resources needed to carry
out the implementation tasks of the directive concerning measures for a high common level
of security of network and information systems across the Union

Interpretation of key definitions of the Strategy

‘Cyberspace’ means a set of globally interconnected, decentralized, ever-changing electronic
information systems and societal and economic processes in the form of data and information
through these systems. Hungary's cyberspace is the part of electronic information systems of
the global cyberspace which is located in Hungary, and from among societal and economic
processes in the form of data and information through the electronic systems of global
cyberspace those which takes place in Hungary or are directed to Hungary or in which Hungary
is involved.

‘Cyber security’ means continuous and planned use of political, legal, economic, educational,
awareness-raising and technical tools to manage existing risks in cyberspace which, ensuring
an acceptable level of risk in cyberspace, transform cyberspace into a reliable environment for
the smooth functioning and operation of societal and economic processes.


‘Security incident response’ means documenting the security incident in the electronic
information system, eliminating its consequences, determining the causes and responsibilities,
and taking planned action to prevent the occurrence of similar security incidents in the future.
‘Network and information system’ means an electronic communication network as defined in
the Electronic Communication Act, and any device or group of interconnected or related
devices from among which one or more perform automated processing of digital data under a
program; or the digital data stored, processed, retrieved or transmitted for the purpose of its
operation, use, protection and maintenance.

Establishment on the justification for developing a strategy for the security of network
and information systems

The opportunities offered by digital technology, which have become available to almost
everyone, pose a significant cyber security risk, as threats from cyberspace disrupt the proper
functioning of information and communication systems and government backbone networks,
endanger the information assets and critical infrastructure elements of nation states. Large-scale
cyberattacks are becoming more common. The complexity and volume of cyber threats are
increasing, and also various groups and organizations are using cyberspace to spread ideologies
in an increasingly intense way.

The main purpose of cybercrime is causing damage, the mass acquisition of financial and
personal data, as well as economic, financial, political influencing. Beyond data theft, crippling
of electronic services for damaging purposes, distribution of spams and malicious codes and
the development of robotic networks (networks of infected machines that can be used for
malicious purposes) are widespread. A significant threat is hacktivism that often covers
ideologically motivated attacks to achieve some ideological goals or to mediate some ideology.
Sophisticated covert attacks, typically for cyber espionage, pose a growing threat, which are
presumably backed by state support.

Extremely sophisticated attacks are important sources of threat under which attackers can carry
out their harmful activities in secret for a long time (information leakage, destruction,
espionage, etc.).

Attacks on network and information systems as critical information infrastructures become
more common, more complex and more sophisticated. Attacks are characterized by obstruction
of the core functions necessary to sustain the functioning of society, therefore they seek to
weaken the internal cohesion of society.

The number of cyberattacks against critical infrastructures shows a significant increase. This
increase is supported by the fact that based on the data of the ICS-CERT for the prevention of
various cyberattacks on industrial systems (critical infrastructure security organization in the
USA) had to deal with only 39 security incidents in the United States in 2010, while this number
was already 140 in 2011 and 290 in 2016.

According to the data of Eurostat', almost all businesses in the EU (98%) use computer recently,
and only 32% of them have a formally defined information security policy. Regarding

1 Sources used:

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/infographs/ict/
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/main-tables
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/database


large companies, this proportion reached 72%, while for small and medium-sized enterprises it
was less than a third (31%).

According to Eurostat's 2016 data on the IT security preparedness of companies, Hungary is
lagging behind the countries of the European Union, as only 9% of the small and medium-sized
enterprise sector has an information security policy, while in the case of Hungarian large
companies this proportion is 53%.

Among the Hungarian companies, in the most unprepared construction sector, on average, 3%
have, while even in the most prepared ICT sector only 36% have IT security policy. While in
the EU, on average, more than 20% of the companies provide for protection in the event of a
security incident involving the destruction or damage of data, this ratio does not reach 10% for
any of the risks in the case of Hungarian companies.

According to relevant data, 75% of domestic Internet users use Windows operating system,
including 10% of them, who still use the outdated, vulnerable Windows XP, which Microsoft
has not supported with security updates since 2014, while its global share is barely one-fifth of
that (2.2%). The proportion of Internet users on mobile phones or other smart devices is growing
rapidly, the Android operating system being the most popular (38%), the safe use of which
requires more attention from the users, and most device manufacturers do not provide security
updates after a few years from the date of release.

According to the World Bank's 2016 data, the Hungarian Internet servers use a much lower
proportion of secure encryption solutions than the average of the European Union or even
OECD countries.

According to Eurostat's 2016 data on the labour market situation of IT professionals, just over
a quarter of businesses across the EU employ some kind of IT professional. While this usually
means own employees in the case of operational responsibilities, it is outsourced for
information and data security jobs at more than half of the companies.

Among the businesses that planned to hire some kind of IT professional, more than half of the
Hungarians reported difficulties, while this proportion is, on average, only 40% in the EU.

According to the latest data, the proportion of infected machines is 14.1% in Hungary, 7.8%
worldwide. For comparison with some European countries this proportion is for instance 2.9%
in Germany, 5.5% in France, 10.2% in Croatia, 7.6% in Slovakia.

According to the data of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank (Central Bank of Hungary - MNB), 1.3
billion forints in damage was incurred at the financial institutions in 2016 from electronic
payment abuses — from the vast majority of transactions initiated via Internet and mobile phones
—; although nearly 90% of the attempts detected failed, this still resulted in a reduction of only
around 50% in damage value.

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Digital_economy_and_society_statistics_-
_enterprises

http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/document/2018-20/hu-desi_2018-country-profile-
lang_4AA43283-EC48-996F-09918493E34A691F_52334.pdf


These types of damage are comparable in magnitude to damage from bank card fraud; however,
they far exceeded the damage caused by abuses linked to paper-based transactions or even
ATMs.

The number and total value of damage attributable to electronic systems also shows an
increasing trend in the period between 2008 and 2016 examined by the MNB.

According to Eurostat's data on household Internet use in 2008-2016, almost half of the
Hungarians aged 16-74 (48%) has already used the Internet in order to get in contact with a
public institution; this ratio gradually caught up with the EU average from 28% in 2008, despite
the fact that the Hungarian population uses the Internet in a slightly smaller proportion (79%)
than the EU average (82%). 71% of the EU citizens (who used the Internet in the year prior to
the 2016 survey) has already shared some personal data online. The most common types are
contact information (61% of the Internet users), which is followed by personal data, for instance
name, birth date or ID card number (52%) and payment data, for instance credit/debit card or
bank account number (40%). Nearly more than one-fifth (22%) provided other personal data,
for instance photos or information on their health, employment or income.

It seems that the younger generations make their personal data more accessible: more than
three-quarters (78%) of the Internet users aged 16-24 shared some personal information online,
compared to 57% of the users aged 65-74.

In Hungary, 36% of the Internet users reported finding a virus or other infection on their
computer.

The Hungarian Cyber Security Act prescribing IT security requirements to state and municipal
institutions provides an opportunity for bodies as an interim measure to achieve the required
security level gradually, at the same time it can be concluded that the institutions are
significantly behind in catching up. Meeting new security requirements in an existing system
requires significantly more effort, than an additional need to take the requirements into account
when designing a new system. As the institutions did not have the resources to meet these
additional security needs either as a subjective right or through tenders, these requirements are
met only in exceptional cases where the institution managed them or took them into account in
its new development.

To enforce a higher rate of compliance with security requirements, from 2016 the National
Electronic Information Security Authority (hereinafter referred to as ‘National Electronic
Information Security Authority’) integrated its monitoring into the tender procedure published
in the call for proposals of the Public Administration Development Operational Program
(PADOP). In this context, the National Electronic Information Security Authority carries out
the monitoring of the compliance of the established electronic information systems financed by
the PADOP projects with the information security norms and requirements, already from the
planning stage. Beyond the monitoring, the National Electronic Information Security Authority
also helps the stakeholders with targeted awareness-raising, information and advisory activities
in order to support the successful and safe realization of the projects.

The maturity of the domestic market in the field of cyber security of business IT development
projects is currently low. Hungarian companies, especially small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs), typically pay little attention and resources to cyber security in digital development


projects. The reason for this is the low capital supply and the fact that security does not play a
central role in the digital attitudes of the customers served, thus they do not even demand high
cyber security requirements from service providers.

The market expects, first of all, low investment and operating costs from IT projects, secondly
it focuses on meeting functional and performance requirements.

Cyber security considerations are less marginalized for those market actors, where the current
legal regulations impose data protection and business continuity requirements, which are
enforced by authority supervision (e.g. regarding payment service providers and insurance
companies). As a result, IT security management in Hungarian digital development projects
does not reach the level required by current and expected threats identified in cyberspace and
the vulnerabilities of the implemented systems, as well as the resulting risks.

The following need to be recorded in relation to critical infrastructure protection. Based on the
Council Directive 2008/1 14/EC being effective from 2008 on the identification and designation
of European critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection,
critical infrastructure status is determined according to a different methodology for each sector,
but in each case, it ends with an itemized designation. The sectors in which the designation
criteria have been defined by 31 December 2017 are as follows:

a) energy,

b) water,

c) agricultural economy,

d) protection of public security,

e) healthcare,

f) finance,

g) national defence,

h) information and communication technology.

Number of registered crimes according to the definitions of the European Union Working Party
on General Matters including Evaluation (hereinafter referred to as ‘GENV AL’)
Number of registered crimes
accor ding to the definitions of the | In 2013 In 2014 | In 2015 | In 2016] In 2017
GENVAL
Acts affecting only information 3554 2398 2819 4187 5098
systems, mainly related to
cyberattacks
Information system fraud 250 1398 2176 3409 4467
Violation of information systems or 823 565 520 702 586
related data breach
Circumvention of technical security 580 31 15 44 8
measures protecting information
systems
Abuse of non-cash payment 1897 388 95 20 28
instruments
Illegal data acquisition 4 16 13 12 9



Acts where computer/IT systems 3959 917 873 23439 1120
serve as a tool or target, especially
in the case of online bank card
fraud
Counterfeiting non-cash payment 49 118 95 392 713
instruments
Facilitating the counterfeiting of non- 3 1 3 3 1
cash payment instruments
Abuse of non-cash payment 3907 798 7715 23044 406
instruments
Total: 7513 3315 3692 | 27626 6218

In 2016, GENVAL reviewed and assessed the practical implementation and operation of
European policies concerning the prevention of and fight against cybercrime in Hungary.

As a result of the assessment, GENVAL concluded that Hungary is committed to taking
effective domestic and international joint actions against cybercrime to which it also gave a
number of tangible signs (Presidency Conference in 2011, Budapest Cyberspace Conference in
2012, Cyber Security Strategy, comprehensive development of institutional system and
response capabilities, active participation in forms of cooperation regarding Council of Europe,
UN, EU and the National Cyber Security Conference held for the third time in 2018, which
aimed at promoting cooperation between the public and private sectors to a higher level).

Based on the experience of the last 5 years, it can be stated that Hungary treats the issue as a
priority and supports relevant forms of EU and international cooperation and initiatives, strives
to keep up with trends, technical developments. Significant progress has been made in
developing the responsiveness of both the institutional system and law enforcement and crisis
management mechanisms. The evaluation committee of the GENVAL Working Group made
some suggestions, as for instance that a closer and more regulated cooperation is needed
between areas of cyber security and cyber law enforcement.

Governance Framework for the Strategy

Current and future cyber security challenges can only be addressed effectively and require an
effective national cyber governance system. Taking into account the defence commitments at
NATO and at European Union level, the European and international cooperation and
information-sharing agreements at various levels, the NIS Directive and horizontal issues
related to cyber security.

The National Cyber Security Coordination Council (hereinafter referred to as ‘Council’) is the
proposing and advisory body of the Government, which coordinates the activities of the bodies
specified in the law as defined in the law and its implementing regulations, thus implementing
the governmental coordination included in Hungary's National Cyber Security Strategy. The
Council is made up of the state officials delegated by ministers in the fields affected by cyber
security, as well as the heads of certain national competent bodies not under the control of the
Government.


The Council is assisted by the Cyber Security Forum composed of senior economic, scientific
and civil society leaders, which supports the Council in its work as an advisory and proposing
body.

The Council's coordination activities and the implementation of its decisions are assisted by
sectoral and functional cyber security working groups. Civil servants and non-governmental
experts invited by the cyber coordinator, on the basis of proposals from the Council and the
Forum, take part in their work.

As a result of the amendment of the Hungarian Cyber Security Act effective from 16 July 2015,
the National Cyber Security Center was established from | October 2015 under the direction of
the Special Service for National Security which covers the GovCERT-Hungary, the National
Electronic Information Security Authority and the E-Security Intelligence Center and which
enables more efficient task execution and information flow. The qualitative and quantitative
development of the available capacities of the National Cyber Security Center is justified by
the growing demand for electronic information security supervisory and support tasks.

Regarding state and municipal bodies covered by the Hungarian Cyber Security Act, the general
competence in security incident response belongs to the incident response center functioning
within the Special Service for National Security, and the official authority competence belongs
to the National Electronic Information Security Authority also functioning within the Special
Service for National Security.

The Special Service for National Security also performs official authority and incident response
tasks for digital service providers under the NIS Directive and — with the exception of the
electronic information systems for defence purposes and electronic information systems of the
national security service performing civil intelligence activities — incident response tasks related
to critical systems designated as European or national critical infrastructures.

Regarding the electronic information systems for defence purposes, the organization
performing military national security activities and the national security service performing
civil intelligence activities independently perform security incident response, supervision and
other information security functions in relation to their own systems.

Regarding the electronic information systems of the infrastructures designated as European or
national critical infrastructures based on the Act on the identification, designation and
protection of critical systems and facilities, the official authority tasks under the Hungarian
Cyber Security Act are performed by the Ministry of Interior National Directorate General for
Disaster Management (NDGDM).

Regarding the electronic information systems and communication service providers not covered
by the Hungarian Cyber Security Act, the Institute for Computer Science and Control of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences operates an information security incident response
organization (HunCERT).

Within the framework of the National Information Infrastructure Development (NIID)
Program, the Government Informatics Development Agency operates a computer security
incident response organization (NIID CSIRT). The NID CSIRT is an IT security and incident
response group belonging to the NIID Program, to a service provider of the Hungarian public
education, higher education, research and public collections. The purpose of the group is to
assist in the response and coordination of computer and network security incidents in all cases
where at least one NIID member institution is involved. Furthermore, the working group of the

10


NIID CSIRT also provides important security, prevention and rectification information to the
NID member institutions.

The Faculty of Law Enforcement at the University of Public Administration established the
Department against Cybercrime within the Institute of Criminalistics in order to ensure an
adequate number of specialists who participated in specialized law enforcement training in the
higher education system. The Cyber Security Academy of the University of Public
Administration participates in the organization of trainings and further trainings related to cyber
security, and in the coordination of educational and research activities related to cyberspace
security and related resources.

11


Objectives of the Strategy

1. Strengthening trust in the digital environment

LJ Strengthening professional cooperation

Only proper communication, knowledge-sharing and disciplined, coordinated defence,
demonstrated in the event of an emergency will provide a solution to the new risks of
cyberspace.

The tasks related to security issues and security incident response are of particular importance
and represent an activity with appropriate responsibilities not only for information security
professionals, but also for organizations operating electronic information systems, citizens and
the media. For this reason, in accordance with international practice, it is necessary to establish
a set of rules to ensure responsible procedure and communication (rules for responsible
information sharing/,,responsible disclosure”) for the detection of and response to
vulnerabilities and security incidents.

Identification of governmental and non-governmental actors performing tasks in the field of
cyber security, precise definition of their functions and powers, and assessment of the
competencies required to hold such positions. The functions and powers of organizations need
to be reviewed and possible overlaps shall be identified.

The rules for cooperation and decision-making procedures shall be laid down for the
cooperation between these organizations.

It is a priority to identify the areas where the necessary cooperation has not yet been developed.
Establishing cooperation and starting dialogue shall be encouraged in these areas.

Measures:

1.) the effectiveness of cooperation in the forums set up already for the cooperation between
governmental, market, educational and civil society actors shall be reviewed;

2.) a forum shall be ensured where there is an opportunity for social dialogue and wide-
ranging information sharing, clarification of the role of ethical hackers and the
relationship between society and ethical hackers;

3.) it shall be identified in which areas the existing cooperation shall be improved;

4.) the establishment of coordinated prevention, detection, mitigation and response
mechanisms is essential to enable the information sharing and mutual assistance among
public authorities, public and civil organizations and incident response centers;

5.) it is necessary to encourage ‘Bug Bounty’ programs launched by market- and public
administration organizations, in which actors wishing to identify vulnerabilities in IT
systems can draw the attention of the organizations to security errors within the
framework of sound conditions and clear rules;

6.) cyber security exercises shall be conducted at specified intervals to further improve
responsiveness and defence capabilities;

7.) there is a need to raise awareness of the shared responsibility of the public and private
sectors.

12


1.2 Raising security awareness

In the digital world, it is becoming an increasingly important task and it is necessary to raise
the awareness of citizens and various actors in society, in order to master the safe use of digital
devices and services that become part of everyday life.

Hungary takes an active role in the work and organization of domestic and international
awareness forums and campaigns related to cyber security in order to make the knowledge
needed to use the digital world safely available to the widest possible target audience. (European
Cyber Security Month campaign by the European Network and Information Security Agency
in October each year, Safer Internet Program, Digital Immune Booster Program).

The specialized agencies — in cooperation with civil, economic and scientific actors — support
the awareness-raising activities aimed at the safe use of cyberspace and at the promotion of
practical knowledge in order that individual users, companies and organizations can use their
digital devices and government and market electronic services in a confident and secure way.

Nowadays, there is a growing interest and attention from the media and also citizens about
certain major vulnerabilities, security incidents and campaigns, it is therefore important to
inform citizens and economic actors about the contact details of credible information and
assistance forums.

It is an extremely important objective of Hungary for the monitoring of the digital world that
authentic data is available to the Government on the knowledge, awareness, preparedness and
threat situation of the population and economic actors.

Measures:

8.) the population and economic actors shall be aware where they can obtain authentic
information and where they can turn for help;

9.) authentic, follow-up data shall be available on the knowledge, awareness, preparedness
and threat situation of the population and economic actors;

10.) incentives shall be developed to increase the proportion of organizations with
information security policies in the SME sector.

13 Law enforcement — development of cyber law enforcement

Crimes committed with the help of computer systems and against computers are now a special
category of crime. The high number of offences committed and the extent of the damage caused
thereby justify the need for law enforcement agencies to deal with the detection and
identification of such cases as effectively as possible, together with preventive measures and
the mitigation of damage, including discouraging the future infringing behaviour of the
perpetrators.


Measures:

11.) law enforcement and judiciary shall improve the capacity to fight against cybercrime;
12.) competent bodies shall actively cooperate and share information in domestic and
international organizations and cooperation against cybercrime.

14 Development of a professional management institutional system

The revision of the functions and powers and the rules of cooperation of the organizational
system under the government's responsibility and the institutions involved in the performance
of tasks (organizations performing tasks related to national security, national defence, law
enforcement, disaster management and protection of critical institutions and facilities) shall be
considered as a priority goal.

In order to stimulate the digital economy and bridge the digital divide, it is essential to support
cyber security in the private sector with an institution which is able to transmit advanced cyber
security solutions for the Hungarian corporate sector.

The EU Member States shall ensure to have well-functioning CSIRTs (technical units for
averting computer security incidents) and sectoral network security emergency response teams
that coordinate them by means possible (hereinafter referred to as ‘CSIRT), which possess
effective and compatible capabilities to deal with security incidents and risks, as well as meeting
the essential requirements to ensure efficient cooperation at EU level. In this way, it is possible
to cover the activities of privately owned critical or otherwise critical infrastructure and retail
service providers, too (e.g. bank systems, healthcare). These units can be coordinated by a
specialized institution in terms of information sharing towards further domestic and
international information-sharing bodies.

Measures

13.) the specialized institutions (CSIRTs and authorities) necessary in the sectors covered
by the NIS Directive shall be designated or established in accordance with the
requirements of the Directive;

14.) an organizational system in line with the objectives set out in the Strategy shall be
developed;

15.) the information security authority system for critical systems, facilities and services
shall be improved, in order to enforce the requirements of the Directive across sectors;

16.) in addition to the incident response center under the Hungarian Cyber Security Act, a
national incident response center shall be set up by examining the extension of existing
cyber security regulations, in order to provide cyber security services available to a
wider range of users of national cyberspace.


2. Protection of digital infrastructure

2.1 Quality management of IT developments

One of the basic conditions for effective defence against cyberattacks is that the development
of quality assurance processes - already at the planning stage - in IT developments, as well as
definition and measurement of cyber security criteria shall play a significant role.

In line with international industry standards, the proposed direction of development is that the
basic quality requirements, including cyber security requirements for the new IT solution shall
be defined at the planning stage in the case of IT development tasks. It is important that a
competent responsible person is appointed to monitor compliance with security requirements,
furthermore that an easily accessible, understandable methodology — sample documentation and
measures and other support tools — are available which help the quality assurance process.

Measures:

17.) creating an easily accessible, understandable and usable information base;

18.) developing modular methodological guidelines for IT projects of different
complexity;

19.) developing free aids for internal quality assurance;

20.) it is necessary to develop a Hungarian-English bilingual, free, modular, cyber
security quality management knowledge base, accessible to anyone.

2.2 Increasing the security of government electronic services

The operation of the government and the administration shall be supported by such a stable and
secure IT background that enables large-scale electronification of the internal public
administration processes and administrative services for the population and businesses, as well
as the widespread digitalization and public access to information and content of state interest.

It is key to both the reliable and stable operation of public administration and the provision of
e-government services and electronic public services that government electronic information
systems operate securely, are interoperable and serve all subsystems, institutions and users. This
presupposes the systematic construction of a government IT background which is able to
provide stable and reliable provision of traditional IT services and cloud-based solutions
expected to spread to more and more areas, as well as application lease (ASP) and software
services (SaaS) in terms of infrastructure, operation and development.

In case of electronic government services, it is of high importance that the security of networks,
systems, processes and user data can be guaranteed at the highest possible level on the part of
the public administration. One of the success criteria for e-government services is precisely to
ensure that citizens and businesses can be sure that the systems are continuously operational
and that services are available, and their data may only be seen for the purpose for which they
have been


determined, only by the systems and persons authorized to do so.

The Hungarian Cyber Security Act and the decrees issued on the basis of the authorization of
this Act provide an appropriate basis for the cyber defence and information security activities
of state- and local government bodies. In parallel with the development of technology, state and
municipal bodies shall keep pace with the constantly changing requirements of information
security.

Measures:

21.) a stable and secure government IT background shall be established and operated
reliably;

22.) maximum protection of critical information infrastructures, internal public
administration systems and external applications, as well as user data appearing in
them shall be ensured from the point of view of national security and the internal
operation of public administration and the availability of electronic public
administration services;

23.) maximum protection of networks, IT infrastructure and applications serving the
internal systems and external services of the public administration shall be ensured;
24.) security oversight of all the subsystems covering the whole spectrum of public

administration shall be ensured taking into account sectoral specificities;

25.) the fulfilment of IT developments receiving government support shall be linked to the
implementation of security standards;

26.) a task plan shall be prepared for existing e-public services to achieve the required level
of security;

27.) acommon set of security requirements for IT developments shall be ensured and made
mandatory by tightening up current practices and regulations.

2.3 Strengthening international cooperation

Hungary strives to guarantee the free and secure use of global cyberspace through its
international relations system and organizational memberships; therefore, it seeks to establish
cooperation based on mutual trust with all state and non-state actors of the global cyberspace
with similar values to Hungary. Hungary intends to further strengthen its active role in regional
and international cooperation at strategic and operational levels, particularly in cyber security
cooperation within the European Union, NATO and the Central and Eastern European region,
as well as in formulating international expectations and regulations within these organizations.

It is Hungary's priority interest to maintain its active cooperation in the cyber defence exercises
and planning of the international community, thus enabling the continuous development of the
international knowledge of our organizations, the establishment of a common operational
protocol. It is especially important that the participation of domestic institutions and
organizations are coordinated on international cooperation platforms. Also, the establishment
of active participation in the cooperation and activities of the communities and centers for
sectoral cooperation (ISACs, sectoral CSIRTs) is of high importance through the specialized
organizations designated and established to pursue new purposes. Hungary aims to maintain an
active role in the Euro-Atlantic and global communities and organizations of security incident
response centers and to further deepen its active cooperation with European or international
organizations working in certain areas of cyber security.


Measures:

28.) cooperation between the EU institutions as defined in the NIS Directive and the
designated domestic institutions shall be initiated and strengthened;

29.) it is necessary to coordinate and enhance the international cooperation of domestic
institutions;

30.) participation in international cyber security exercises shall be achieved in order to
promote international cooperation and further develop international response and
defence capabilities;

31.) Hungary shall emphasize its interests and values in both its bilateral and multilateral
relations in the course of its external relations activities related to cyberspace.

2A4 Protection of essential services and critical infrastructures and their services

The protection of each of the critical infrastructures is a complex task, in the implementation
of which, in addition to the various state bodies, economic actors shall also be involved.

A key objective is that the protection of designated critical systems and facilities, including
operators of essential services and the operators of digital service providers shall place an
increasing emphasis on the risk-proportionate and comprehensive protection of their network
and information systems.

A risk assessment methodology shall be developed to enable the correlated collection of data
to identify risks as accurately as possible, to make a dynamic estimate of the business impact
produced by a possible outage of threatened services and to identify the measures with which
the preparation for threats can be started in due time and their potential impact can be minimized
as soon as possible.

The methodology shall include metrics that are mandatory for organizations to report annually
and can also serve as a basis for the preparation of an annual national cyber security threat
report.

Measures:

32.) a methodology of risk assessment and risk analysis at sectoral level shall be developed;

33.) cross-sectoral or sector-specific consensus recommendations and good practices shall
be freely available regarding achieving security purposes;

34.) the establishment and maintenance of cooperation between public institutions and
private sector actors shall be promoted based on mutual trust;

35.) a single package of services capable of complementing protection shall be made
available to the widest possible range of critical infrastructure operators;

36.) targeted tendering opportunities for the development of effective prevention and rapid
response capabilities in the field of physical and cyber security of critical systems,

17


facilities and services are necessary to be provided in order to improve the operation of
operators, service providers, relevant authorities and incident response centers;

37.) it is necessary to raise information security awareness activities for operators of critical
systems, facilities and services with the participation of relevant authorities and
organizations;

38.) critical infrastructure operators shall be involved in national and international
protection exercises.

2.5 Development of cyber defence. response and reaction capabilities

Due to the growing threat posed by cyberspace threats, the traditional detection-tracking
behaviour is outdated. It is a fundamental national interest to ensure the concentrated
availability of adequate cyber defence, response and reaction capabilities.

The aim is to develop and apply a wide range of passive and active tools for cyber defence,
response and reaction capabilities on the existing base.

Passive cyber defence and response devices are the system elements built in the IT
infrastructure, which perform the function of protection against threats and ensure the timely
availability of information on threats. From among the passive tools, the tool or activity suitable
for the detection of malicious infrastructures, monitoring and identification of attack activity is
worth underlining from the point of view of development activity, which is essential to ensure
that countermeasures are targeted.

Active measures are mainly human activities at the current technological level which mean
continuous monitoring of threats against IT systems and varying degrees of response to them.

Measures:

39.) it is necessary to develop detection, processing (analysis) and investigation skills,
which make it possible to identify, classify threats or attacks and establish the source
thereof;

40.) due to the logical connections of these capabilities, governance and management
based on uniform coordination at the sectoral level and on cross-sectoral coordination
shall be established;

41.) a system for rapid situational awareness, evaluation and risk analysis needs to be
developed;

42.) a toolkit for different levels of response to cyber threats needs to be developed;

43.) it shall be made possible for civilians and professionals working in the civil field to
take part in national cyber defence in special cases.


3. Support for economic actors

3.1 Cooperation with research centers and strengthening the role of research and
development
Cutting-edge capability in information technology security has developed in higher education
institutions and other public research centers. In order that these capabilities continue to develop
in Hungary and contribute to the nation's security purposes to a greater extent, it is important
that there is a close cooperation between these workshops and the market and government
actors. In order to strengthen state cyber security research and development, it is essential to
establish strategic cooperation with higher education and scientific research workshops that
present outstanding and internationally recognized results and to concentrate R&D tasks and
resources to those research bases where the appropriate expertise and technical background is
already ensured.

Measures:

44.) _ the training of engineers and researchers and the care of outstanding talents, as well
as the conditions of their activities in Hungary shall be ensured;

45.) | aresearch strategy in the field of cyber security needs to be established which aims to
enhance the use of cyber security tools, software and products developed in Hungary
for strengthening the cyber security of the Hungarian institutional system;

46.) related research and development topics shall be identified, and public incentive
opportunities shall be created, including incentives for Hungarian start-up enterprises;

47.) the cyber security research-development-innovation strategy described in point 45
shall prioritize the topics of the European Union's R&D&I calls to be announced
between 2021 and 2027, thereby helping innovative Hungarian organizations to
participate in international projects as a matter of priority;

48.) the aim of economic diplomacy activities shall be to support the emergence of
Hungarian service and development centers dealing with cyber security.

3.2 Supporting Hungarian digital innovation, developing support structures, performing
coordination tasks

It is important to support domestic digital innovation with an information security focus which
can be a major help in digitalization in Hungary, raising cyber security awareness and achieving

data protection capabilities.

The government has already taken major steps (lasting currently, as well) to improve cyber
security in businesses, these are the following in short:

19


1. At the end of 2015, the Economic Development and Innovation Operational Program
(EDIOP) 3.2.1 Modern Enterprise Program (MEP) was launched in government-
chamber cooperation, which gives a special focus to increasing IT security in companies
in its activities of digital attitude and motivation affecting SMEs. Thus, within the
project:

e this kind of attitude-forming materials are prepared and available on the program portal
https://vallalkozzdigitalisan.hu/ (and will still be prepared),

e free chamber corporate ICT consultants across the country can help SMEs with
information security, special emphasis is placed on this,

e IT security-focused events have been (and will be) organized,

e several business cyber security products and services are available at a discount,

e adetailed survey was also conducted on the cyber defence capabilities of businesses.

The program will continue until the spring of 2021.

2. In the EDIOP 3.2.2-8.2.4-16 combined tender, which was closely related to the MEP
and has been available since spring 2017, supporting corporate IT developments”, IT
security-related hardware, software, consulting, service costs are eligible costs for
applicant SMEs, since May 2018, also GDPR-related consulting and service activities
can be integrated into the project (supported) in a targeted way.

In the continuation and expansion of government digital economic development programs,
efforts shall be made to further increase IT security in the small and medium-sized enterprise
sector. In addition to and related to these, it may also be necessary to launch education and
training programs available to employees of enterprises in a subsidized form, beyond hardware
and software elements, with security operation and security compliance, audit focus.

In addition to all this, beyond the resource-based support of the Hungarian small and medium-
sized enterprise sector engaged in information and communication technologies, the solution is
to develop a — direct or indirect (tax credit) — targeted support system which aims to financially
strengthen the above-mentioned institutions with proven development and scientific activities
and institutions considered to be protected from cyber security aspects.

Measures:

49.) development of state-subsidized cyber security service packages to help companies of
the sector for procuring and implementing otherwise difficult-to-access, expensive
solutions,

50.) education and training programs available to businesses in a subsidized form, beyond
hardware and software elements, in the topic of security operation and security
compliance, audit.

2 https://www.palyazat.gov.hu/ginop-3.2.2-8.2.4-16-vilalati-komplex-infokommunikcis-s-mobilfejlesztsek-

felhalap-online-zleti-szolgitatsok-terjesztsnek-tmogatsa-1

20


3.3 Creating a competitive domestic knowledge base

Hungary's goal is to promote cyber security education, training and research and development
opportunities to create a competitive domestic knowledge base which meets both international
practice and the needs of the domestic labour market.

Hungary's Digital Education Strategy sets out goals and measures - with the same motivation
as above - for the development of digital competencies, awareness and information, as well as
special fields of education and vocational training that promote information security.

Measures:

51.) _ the cyber security working group shall review current issues and make suggestions for
addressing identified issues;

52.) _ the relevant educational and vocational qualifications shall provide a reliable basis in
the labour market competition;

53.) it is necessary to create a common IT knowledge base accessible to all relevant actors;

54.) the opportunity shall be ensured that the wide range of society has access to
information security training and qualifications at each level of competence;

55.) information security qualification requirements and training programs shall be
developed regarding the personal staff of the operators of essential services;

56.) local and national cyber security exercises and competitions held with uniform quality

standards shall receive support which aim to involve and increase the knowledge of
young people in secondary and higher education.

21
















