AUSTRALIA’S
CYBER SECURITY
STRATEGY 2020

© Commonwealth of Australia 2020
With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms, all material 
presented in this publication is provided under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International license at:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.
This means this license only applies to material as set out in 
this document.
The details of the relevant license conditions are available on the 
Creative Commons website at:
https://creativecommons.org/ as is the full legal code for the CC BY 4.0 
license at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.
Contact us
Enquiries regarding the licence and any use of this document 
are welcome at:
Cyber, Digital and Technology Policy Division
Department of Home Affairs
4 National Circuit Barton ACT 2600
cybersecuritystrategy@homeaffairs.gov.au
P - 20-02344

AUSTRALIA’S
CYBER SECURITY
STRATEGY 2020


Table of Contents
Minister’s foreword
4
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020: At a glance
6
Overview
7
The threat environment
10
Consultation
15
Our strategy
18
Our response
21
Action plan
39
Implementation and measuring progress
44
Appendix A: Cyber Security Strategy 2020 Funding Commitments
47

Minister’s foreword
Ensuring Australians are secure online is a shared responsibility – everyone has a role to play. 
This Strategy sets out our plan to protect Australians online. 
The world has never been more interconnected; our reliance on the internet for our prosperity and 
way of life never greater. Australia’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has shown the importance 
of secure online connectivity. It has also shown Australians’ resilience and resolve to work together for 
a common goal. That same whole-of-nation partnership between government, businesses and the 
community must also be applied to ensuring Australia is cyber secure. 
Australians are rightfully seizing the opportunities of our digital world. However, as the opportunities 
have increased, so too have cyber threats. Well-equipped and persistent state-sponsored actors are 
targeting critical infrastructure and stealing our intellectual property. 
Cyber criminals are also doing great harm, infiltrating systems from anywhere in the world, stealing 
money, identities and data from unsuspecting Australians. They are taking advantage of COVID-19 
to target families and businesses, including health and medical research facilities. And they are hiding 
on the dark web to traffic drugs and other illicit goods, and share abhorrent images of child abuse. 
Our response must be bold to meet this threat head on. 
This Strategy positions us to meet these evolving threats. Our vision is a more secure online world 
for Australians, their businesses and the essential services upon which we all depend. We will deliver 
this vision together, through complementary action by governments, businesses and the community. 
Through this Strategy the Coalition Government will invest $1.67 billion over ten years in cyber 
security – the largest ever financial commitment to cyber security. We will develop new Government 
capabilities, incentivise industry to protect themselves and their customers, build trust in the digital 
economy, and support the community to be secure online. 
4
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

This Strategy will benefit all Australians. Families and businesses 
will have increased access to reliable cyber security advice 
and assistance. The Coalition Government will boost law 
enforcement’s capacity to combat cyber criminals, improve 
threat information sharing with industry and support initiatives 
to grow a skilled cyber workforce. Working in partnership with 
owners of critical infrastructure, the Government will bolster 
protecting the critical systems on which all Australians depend.   
Our work on ensuring Australia is cyber secure does not end 
here. This Strategy takes into account that effective cyber 
security will require an ongoing effort by all of us. The Coalition 
Government will continue to engage industry, state and 
territory governments and the public to ensure that initiatives 
under this Strategy support economic recovery through strong 
cyber resilience.
This Strategy was developed with the assistance and input of 
the many Australians who participated in the public consultation. I would like to thank them and the 
Industry Advisory Panel chaired by Telstra Chief Executive Officer Andy Penn for their commitment, 
enthusiasm and sound advice, which has been fundamental to developing this Strategy.
The Hon Peter Dutton MP
Minister for Home Affairs
6 August 2020
5
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

AUSTRALIA’S CYBER 
SECURITY STRATEGY 2020
AT A GLANCE
Vision
A more secure online world for Australians, their 
businesses and the essential services upon 
which we all depend. 
Approach
This vision will be delivered through 
complementary actions by governments, 
businesses and the community. 
Cyber threats continue 
to evolve rapidly
—	
Cyber security threats are increasing. 
Nation states and state-sponsored actors 
and criminals are exploiting Australians 
by accessing sensitive information and for 
financial gain.  
—	
Criminals are using the dark web to buy 
and sell stolen identities, illicit commodities, 
and child exploitation material, as well as 
to commit other crimes. 
—	
Encryption and anonymising technologies 
allow criminals, terrorists and others to 
hide their identities and activities from law 
enforcement agencies. 
—	
Cyber criminals want to take advantage 
of the fact that Australians are more 
connected than ever before.
Strong foundations
This Strategy builds on the 2016 Cyber Security 
Strategy, which invested $230 million to 
advance and protect Australia’s interests online.
Highlights 
This Strategy will invest $1.67 billion over 
10 years to achieve our vision. This includes: 
—	
Protecting and actively defending the 
critical infrastructure that all Australians 
rely on, including cyber security obligations 
for owners and operators.
—	
New ways to investigate and shut down 
cyber crime, including on the dark web.
—	
Stronger defences for Government 
networks and data. 
—	
Greater collaboration to build Australia’s 
cyber skills pipeline.  
—	
Increased situational awareness and 
improved sharing of threat information. 
—	
Stronger partnerships with industry through 
the Joint Cyber Security Centre program.
—	
Advice for small and medium enterprises to 
increase their cyber resilience.
—	
Clear guidance for businesses and 
consumers about securing Internet of 
Things devices.
—	
24/7 cyber security advice hotline for SMEs 
and families.   
—	
Improved community awareness of cyber 
security threats.
6
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Overview
1	
The Australian Government’s vision is 
to create a more secure online world 
for Australians, their businesses and 
the essential services upon which we 
all depend. 
2	
The scale and sophistication of cyber 
threats continue to increase. Australians 
are increasingly reliant on the internet 
and the internet-connected devices 
we use daily. The digital economy is 
the future of Australia’s economy. 
Our experience with the COVID-19 
pandemic demonstrated this by 
highlighting how much Australians 
interact and work online, trusting the 
internet for healthcare, working from 
home, education, entertainment and 
online shopping. It is more important than 
ever to protect Australians online from 
those who would do us harm. 
3	
Australia’s experience of COVID-19 
has other lessons too. Just as we – 
governments, businesses, and the 
community – have relied on each 
other to fight the pandemic, cyber 
security relies on us all playing our part. 
Everyone – governments, businesses and 
the community – has a role to play in 
creating a more cyber secure Australia. 
4	
Cyber security allows families and 
businesses to prosper from the digital 
economy, just as pool fences provide 
peace of mind for households. Cyber 
security needs to be a fundamental and 
integrated part of everyday life, enabling 
Australians to reap the benefits of the 
internet safely and with confidence.
5	
Through this Strategy, the Australian 
Government will build trust in the online 
world by supporting businesses’ cyber 
resilience, including by sharing threat 
information, setting clear expectations of 
roles and strengthening partnerships. 
6	
The Australian Government will work 
with industry to protect our most critical 
systems from sophisticated threats. 
Law enforcement agencies will be given 
greater ability to protect Australians 
online, just as they do in the physical 
world, and will target criminal activity on 
the dark web. The Australian Government 
will confront illegal activity, including by 
using our offensive cyber capabilities 
against offshore criminals, consistent 
with international law. The Australian 
Government will continue to strengthen 
the defences of its networks, including 
against threats from sophisticated nation 
states and state-sponsored actors. 
7
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

7	
Businesses should produce secure 
products and services wherever possible 
as part of a strong and prosperous 
digital economy. A voluntary Code 
of Practice will set out the Australian 
Government’s security expectations for 
the internet-connected consumer devices 
Australians use every day. The Australian 
Government will work with industry to 
consider and clarify the cyber security 
obligations of industry in the future, 
including through regulatory reforms. 
8	
Government and large businesses will 
assist small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) to grow and increase their cyber 
security awareness and capability. 
The Australian Government will work 
with large businesses and service 
providers to provide SMEs with cyber 
security information and tools as part 
of ‘bundles’ of secure services (such as 
threat blocking, antivirus, and cyber 
security awareness training). Integrating 
cyber security products into other service 
offerings will help protect SMEs at scale 
and recognises that many businesses 
cannot employ dedicated cyber security 
staff. Governments will work hand in 
glove with critical infrastructure owners 
to identify and resolve immediate 
vulnerabilities. A Cyber Security National 
Workforce Growth Program will develop a 
skilled cyber workforce that can address 
emerging threats and new challenges, 
and maximise the benefits of the global 
economy’s shift online. 
9	
Not all cyber security risks can be 
addressed by governments and 
industry – individuals should also 
take steps to protect themselves. 
The Australian Government will expand 
efforts to raise awareness of cyber 
security threats and empower the 
community to practise secure online 
behaviours. The Australian Government 
will offer a dedicated online cyber 
security training program, expanding our 
24/7 cyber security advice hotline for 
SMEs and families, and increase funding 
for victim support services. 
10	
These measures will have the combined 
effect of making the internet more 
secure for all Australians. By ensuring the 
Australian Government can counter the 
most sophisticated threats and confront 
illegal behaviour, businesses and the 
community will be exposed to fewer risks 
and will suffer less harm. Australians will 
have greater confidence that essential 
systems are protected. Equipping small 
business owners and the community with 
the information and tools they need to 
protect themselves will encourage greater 
adoption of cyber secure products and 
cyber smart decision-making.
8
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Strong foundations
The 2016 Cyber Security Strategy set out the Australian Government’s plan to meet the dual 
challenges of the digital age – advancing and protecting Australia’s interests online. The 
Australian Government backed the 2016 Strategy with a $230 million investment. 
Feedback from businesses and the community showed that the 2016 Strategy strengthened 
Australia’s cyber security foundations, stimulated private sector investment in the domestic 
cyber security industry, and positioned Australia as a regional cyber security leader. Key 
achievements include:
—	
Opening the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC)
—	
Establishing Joint Cyber Security Centres (JCSCs) to engage state and territory governments 
and industry 
—	
Increasing cyber skills and education investments 
—	
Establishing the 24/7 Global Watch 
—	
Appointing the Ambassador for Cyber Affairs 
—	
Establishing AustCyber, the Australian Cyber Security Growth Network, and the Cyber Security 
Cooperative Research Centre.
This Strategy will build on initiatives that began in 2016, including the ACSC and JCSCs. 
“Australia’s landmark 2016 Cyber Security Strategy has been a 
catalyst for change, launching a series of government and private 
sector activities and responses to cyber security and cyber crime 
challenges.” 
Palo Alto Networks
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
9
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

The threat environment
“The consequence of attacks are increasing in severity, as 
information systems become more central to business and society.” 
Sapien Cyber
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
1	
National Australia Bank (2020), NAB Online Retail Sales Index March 2020, available at https://business.nab.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2020/05/NAB-Online-Retail-Sales-Index-MAR20.pdf
2	 Microsoft and Frost & Sullivan (2018), Understanding the Cybersecurity Threat Landscape in Asia Pacific: Securing the Modern Enterprise 
in a Digital World 
3	 AustCyber (2020), Australia’s Digital Trust Report 2020, available at https://www.austcyber.com/resource/digitaltrustreport2020
11	
Cyber security is at the heart of the 
transition to a digital society. Cyber 
security is a key pillar in ensuring a 
trusted and secure digital economy, 
giving confidence to all participants 
and allowing businesses to prosper and 
thrive. The rapid and widespread uptake 
of digital technology by households 
and businesses following the COVID-19 
pandemic underscores the importance 
of digital technology as an economic 
enabler. Millions of Australians are working 
from home, staying connected through 
apps and using essential digital services 
such as telehealth. Many bricks and 
mortar businesses are moving online for 
the first time – exemplified by revenue 
for the online shopping industry surging 
by 21.8% in March 2020 when viewed in 
year-on-year terms.1 
12	
To maximise the benefits of digital 
transformation, Australians must understand 
and address the threats that it can bring. 
Malicious cyber activity is one of the most 
significant threats impacting Australians. 
Between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2020, the 
ACSC responded to 2,266 cyber security 
incidents at a rate of almost six per day. 
This does not include other incidents referred 
to the police and support organisations. The 
true volume of malicious activity in Australia 
is likely to be much higher. According to one 
expert analysis, cyber incidents targeting 
small, medium and large Australian 
businesses can cost the economy up to 
$29 billion per year, or 1.9% of Australia’s 
gross domestic product (GDP).2 Further, it 
is estimated that a four week interruption 
to digital infrastructures resulting from a 
significant cyber incident would cost the 
economy $30 billion (1.5% of Australia’s Gross 
Domestic Product) and around 163,000 jobs.3
10
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

13	
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted 
the evolving nature of cyber threats. 
Opportunistic cyber criminals quickly 
adapted their methods to take 
advantage of more Australians working, 
studying and connecting online. 
Between 10 and 26 March 2020, the 
ACSC received over 45 pandemic 
themed cybercrime and cyber security 
incident reports, with the Australian 
Competition and Consumer Commission’s 
(ACCC) Scamwatch receiving over 100 
reports of COVID-19 themed scams. 
Campaigns were designed to distribute 
malicious software (malware) or harvest 
personal and financial information from 
unsuspecting Australians. 
Cyber incident
A single event or a series of events that 
threatens the integrity, availability or 
confidentiality of digital information. 
“Affordable and low-tech attacks such as ransomware, phishing 
and malware will continue to rise and a great emphasis from 
Government on supporting small to medium businesses and 
corporate Australia from cyber criminals is required.”
AUCloud
Public Submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
11
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Malicious cyber actors
14	
Australians are being targeted by a range 
of different groups, varying in their intent 
and the sophistication of their tradecraft.
—	
Nation states and state-sponsored 
actors seek to compromise networks 
to obtain economic, policy, legal, 
defence and security information 
for their advantage. Nation states 
and state-sponsored actors may 
also seek to achieve disruptive or 
destructive effects against their 
targets during peacetime or in a 
conflict setting. These actors tend to 
be sophisticated, well-resourced and 
patient adversaries, whose actions 
could impact Australia’s national 
security and economic prosperity. 
—	
Financially motivated criminals 
exploit and access systems for 
financial gain, posing a substantial 
threat to the economic interests of 
Australia and the region. Of particular 
concern are transnational cyber 
crime syndicates, which develop, 
share, sell and use sophisticated 
cyber tools and techniques. 
Criminals are also using the dark 
web to buy and sell stolen identities, 
illicit commodities and child 
exploitation material, as well as to 
commit other crimes. 
Figure 1: Cyber security incidents, by sector (1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020)
Australian Government 
Government (state/terrority)
Other
Individuals
Education and research
Banking and financial services
Information technology
Health
Retail
Legal and professional services
Water
Communications
Transport
Mining and resources
All other affected sectors
0
100
200
300
400
500
Source: Australian Cyber Security Centre
12
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

—	
Issue-motivated groups and 
individuals are primarily concerned 
with drawing attention to their 
causes. They are generally less 
capable and less sophisticated, 
but still able to cause 
significant disruption to industry 
and governments.
—	
Terrorist groups and extremists 
are effective at using the internet 
to communicate and generate 
attention, but generally employ 
very basic cyber techniques and 
capabilities such as distributed 
denial of service (DDoS) activities, 
hijacking social media accounts and 
defacing websites. These groups 
currently pose a relatively low 
cyber threat. 
15	
Highly sophisticated nation states 
and state-sponsored actors continue 
to target governments and critical 
infrastructure providers. Australian 
Government or state and territory 
government entities were targeted 
in 35.4% of the incidents the ACSC 
responded to in the year to 30 June 2020 
(see Figure 1). Around 35% of incidents 
impacted critical infrastructure providers 
that deliver essential services including 
healthcare, education, banking, water, 
communications, transport and energy. 
A successful cyber attack against one 
of these services could have significant 
ramifications for the broader economy 
and Australian way of life. This is occurring 
overseas, as seen in the 2015 disruptions 
of power facilities in Ukraine, the 2017 
Triton attacks on Saudi petrochemical 
facilities, and the NotPetya and 
WannaCry attacks in 2017 that impacted 
financial, transport and healthcare 
services across the globe.
4	 NortonLifeLock (2020), 2019 Cyber Safety Insights Report Global Results, available at now.symassets.com/content/dam/norton/campaign/
NortonReport/2020/2019_NortonLifeLock_Cyber_Safety_Insights_Report_Global_Results.pdf? 
16	
In 2019, one in three Australian adults were 
impacted by cyber crime.4 On average, 
the ACSC’s ReportCyber tool receives 
a cyber crime report every 10 minutes. 
The barrier for entry into cyber criminal 
activity is very low. Underground online 
marketplaces offer cyber crime-as-a-
service or access to high-end hacking 
tools that were once only available 
to nation states. Malicious actors with 
minimal technical expertise can purchase 
illicit tools and services to generate 
alternative income streams, launder 
the proceeds of traditional crimes or 
intrude into networks on behalf of more 
sophisticated adversaries. 
13
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Malicious activity against Australian networks in 2020
On 19 June 2020, the Prime Minister announced that Australian organisations were being 
targeted by a sophisticated state-based cyber actor. This activity targeted Australian 
organisations across a range of sectors, including all levels of government; industry; political 
organisations; education, healthcare and essential service providers; and operators of other 
critical infrastructure.
The Australian Government knows it was a sophisticated state-based cyber actor because of 
the scale and nature of the targeting and the tradecraft used. The ACSC and the Department 
of Home Affairs have published a more detailed technical advisory with advice for Australian 
businesses and organisations to protect themselves. This advisory is available at cyber.gov.au.
Cyber criminals are taking advantage of the COVID-19 crisis to conduct widespread COVID-
19-themed email and SMS phishing campaigns. These campaigns aim to distribute malware or 
harvest personal information from unsuspecting Australians.
To protect Australians, the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) used its offensive cyber 
capabilities to disrupt foreign cyber criminals targeting Australian households and businesses. 
These offensive cyber operations struck back at the foreign criminals behind these COVID-19 
themed phishing campaigns, successfully disabling their infrastructure and blocking their 
access to stolen information. 
The ACSC also worked closely with Australia’s major telecommunications providers and 
web-browser companies Google and Microsoft to disrupt these foreign criminals. These actions 
include flagging websites as malicious at the web-browser level and blocking them from phone 
users. This response showed how close partnerships between government and industry can 
protect Australians from malicious cyber activity. 
Malicious cyber activity on the dark web
The dark web is the part of the internet that allows its users to remain anonymous. It is not easily 
accessible. The dark web facilitates illegal activity such as child sexual abuse, identity theft, 
drug and firearm trafficking and the planning of terror attacks.
The use of anonymising technologies has made it easier to commit serious crimes at volume 
and across jurisdictions. It allows criminals and other malicious actors to operate outside the 
visibility of law enforcement. If our law enforcement agencies are to remain effective in reducing 
cyber crime, their ability to tackle the volume and anonymity enabled by the dark web and 
encryption technologies must be enhanced. As part of this Strategy, the Australian Government 
will work to ensure law enforcement has the powers and capabilities to investigate and disrupt 
cyber crime, including on the dark web. 
14
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Consultation
17	
On 6 September 2019 the Australian 
Government released a public discussion 
paper, ‘A call for views’, to give every 
Australian a say in the development of 
this Strategy. 
18	
The Australian Government received 
215 submissions from individuals and 
organisations, 156 of which are available 
at homeaffairs.gov.au/cybersecurity.
19	
The Australian Government also met with 
more than 1,400 people from across the 
country in face-to-face consultations, 
including workshops, roundtables 
and bilateral meetings. There were 
also dedicated forums attended by 
representatives from large technology 
companies, academia, state and territory 
agencies, local governments and defence 
industry. 
20	 The following key themes were raised 
during the consultation process:
—	
The threat environment is worsening.
—	
Roles and responsibilities 
need clarification.
—	
Government and industry 
partnerships should be strengthened.
—	
Improved two-way information 
sharing is essential.
—	
Standards and regulation are 
necessary to get the basics right.
—	
Growth of cyber crime is outstripping 
our ability to respond.
—	
Many threats can be addressed 
at scale.
—	
Human behaviour is almost always 
part of the problem.
—	
Australia needs more trusted and 
skilled cyber security professionals.
—	
Small businesses are 
particularly vulnerable.
—	
Australia needs to be better 
prepared, especially for a 
national-scale incident.
—	
There are economic opportunities 
for Australia.
15
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

“ACCAN is concerned about the disproportionate impact that 
scams and other cybercrimes have on vulnerable consumers, such 
as those not confident in using the internet, older people and 
people who have less familiarity with the English language.”
Australian Communications Consumer Action Network
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
“Just as there are vulnerable populations for public health concerns, 
we see this mirrored in vulnerable targets for cyber security attacks.”
Accenture
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
“Government should be responsible for ensuring 
telecommunications operators, and operators of critical services 
take measures to safeguard networks and services.”
Optus
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
Our Industry
Advisory Panel
21	
The Minister for Home Affairs (the Minister) 
also established an Industry Advisory 
Panel (the Panel) to provide strategic 
advice to support the development of 
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020. 
The members of the Panel were:
—	
Mr Andrew Penn, CEO and Managing 
Director, Telstra (Chair)
—	
Ms Kirstjen Nielsen, former United 
States Secretary of Homeland Security
—	
Mr Robert Mansfield AO, Chair, Vocus 
Group
—	
Ms Robyn Denholm, Chair, Tesla
—	
Mr Chris Deeble AO CSC, Chief 
Executive, Northrop Grumman Australia
—	
Mr Darren Kane, Chief Security 
Officer, NBN Co.
22	
The Panel met 13 times between 
November 2019 and July 2020, which 
included meetings with the Minister. The 
Panel structured its deliberations around 
12 problem statements based on the key 
themes of feedback raised during the 
public consultation process. The Panel’s 
final report provided recommendations 
covering seven key areas and is available 
at homeaffairs.gov.au/cybersecurity. 
23	
In line with the Panel’s advice, this 
Strategy seeks to clearly set out the 
cyber security roles and responsibilities 
across government, businesses and the 
community as outlined in the next section.
24	
Building on the success of the Panel, a 
standing Industry Advisory Committee will 
be established to ensure industry plays a 
continuing role in shaping the delivery of 
short and longer-term actions set out in 
this Strategy. 
16
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

“Australia will prosper as a digital economy if we continue to 
invest in cyber defences. If we move to comprehensively protect 
ourselves from cyber-crime our businesses will remain competitive, 
our national infrastructure will be protected, the security of our 
institutions – including our democratic electoral processes, which 
have been the subject of malicious cyber-attack in other parts of 
the world – protected and the well-being of Australians improved. 
Acting quickly and decisively will also ensure the benefits outweigh 
the cost of remediation.” 
Andrew Penn
Chair of the Industry Advisory Panel and CEO of Telstra, August 2020
17
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

25	
The Australian Government’s Strategy 
is illustrated in Figure 2. The Australian 
Government’s vision is for a more 
secure online world for Australians, their 
businesses and the essential services 
upon which we all depend.
Figure 2: Our Strategy Illustrated 
Our strategy
Vision
A more secure online world for Australians, their businesses and the 
essential services upon which we all depend.
Actions by governments
Key themes:
—	 Protect critical 
infrastructure, essential 
services and households
—	 Combat cyber crime, 
including on the dark web
—	 Protect Australian 
Government data and 
networks
—	 Share threat information
—	 Strengthen cyber security 
partnerships
—	 Support business to meet 
cyber security standards
—	 Enhance cyber security 
capabilities
Key themes:
—	 Improve baseline security 
for critical infrastructure
—	 Uplift the cyber security 
of SMEs
—	 Provide secure products 
and services
—	 Grow a skilled workforce
—	 Take steps to block 
malicious activity at scale
Actions by businesses
Key themes:
—	 Access and apply 
guidance and 
information on cyber 
security
—	 Make informed 
purchasing decisions
—	 Report cyber crime
—	 Access help and support 
when needed
Actions by the community
18
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

GOVERNMENT 
The Australian Government 
will strengthen the protection 
of Australians, businesses and 
critical infrastructure from the most 
sophisticated threats. State and 
territory and local governments 
have a role in protecting their 
systems from cyber attacks.
BUSINESSES
Businesses should take 
responsibility for securing their 
products and services and 
protecting their customers from 
known cyber vulnerabilities. 
COMMUNITY
The community should take 
responsibility for practising 
secure online behaviours 
and making informed 
purchasing decisions. 
26	
This vision will be delivered through action 
by governments, businesses and the 
community, as illustrated in Figure 3.
—	
The Australian Government will 
strengthen the protection of Australians, 
businesses and critical infrastructure 
from the most sophisticated threats. 
State and territory and local 
governments have a role in protecting 
their systems from cyber attacks.
—	
Businesses should take responsibility 
for securing their products and services 
and protecting their customers from 
known cyber vulnerabilities. 
—	
The community should take 
responsibility for practising secure 
online behaviours and making informed 
purchasing decisions. 
Figure 3: Roles and responsibilities in cyber security
19
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

27	
This approach will enable Australia to 
make best use of its finite resources. 
The Australian Government will focus 
on critical threats and the most 
sophisticated actors, while ensuring 
a baseline level of cyber resilience 
across the economy. The Australian 
Government is best placed to deter 
and respond to sophisticated actors, 
including through defensive and offensive 
cyber capabilities. State and territory 
governments also have a role to play in 
ensuring their networks are not vulnerable 
to cyber intrusions.
28	
Businesses should take responsibility for 
enhancing their cyber security, just as 
they are responsible for the safety and 
quality of their products. The Australian 
Government expects all businesses to 
play this role, and in the first instance will 
introduce legislation in relation to critical 
infrastructure and systems of national 
significance. Many of the initiatives in this 
Strategy aim to help businesses to take 
advantage of the digital economy by 
providing advice, practical tools and joint 
investment in a skilled workforce. 
29	
The community will always have a role to 
play in cyber security. Even with the best 
efforts of governments and businesses, 
Australians will need to know how to 
safeguard themselves against cyber 
security threats. This Strategy puts a 
greater focus on raising awareness of 
secure online behaviours, increasing 
access to victim support services and 
giving all Australians the information 
they need to make cyber secure 
purchasing decisions.
30	 Every part of government, business 
and the community has a role to 
play in implementing this Strategy. 
Although this Strategy is an Australian 
Government initiative, the Australian 
Government recognises the essential 
role of state and territory governments, 
businesses, academia, international 
partners and the broader community 
in realising our vision: to create a more 
secure online world for Australians, their 
businesses and the essential services 
upon which we all depend. Successful 
implementation of this Strategy relies on 
individual and collaborative effort and 
actions by governments, businesses and 
the community.
20
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Actions by governments
“Government has an important leadership role to play, which 
includes assisting organisations and the community to be fully 
cyber aware.”
Ai Group
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
31	
The Australian Government is investing in 
its capabilities to respond to the growing 
cyber security threat. On 30 June 2020, 
the Australian Government announced 
the $1.35 billion Cyber Enhanced 
Situational Awareness and Response 
(CESAR) package. CESAR will ensure 
that ASD, as Australia’s lead operational 
cyber security agency, can identify more 
cyber threats, disrupt more foreign cyber 
criminals, build more partnerships with 
industry and government, and protect 
more Australians. This section explains in 
detail the full suite of tools the Australian 
Government will use to address cyber 
security threats – from voluntary action 
and collaboration to legislation and 
classified capabilities.
Working in partnership with 
businesses
32	
The Australian Government has a very 
important part to play in cyber security. 
It cannot protect all of cyberspace, 
but it will create an environment where 
everyone knows what role they play 
and what the ‘rules of the road’ are 
– including through legislation where 
necessary. This will allow businesses 
and the community to achieve greater 
national cyber security resilience 
so Australia can take advantage of 
the opportunities of an increasingly 
digital economy.
Our response
21
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

33	
In addition to shaping policies to make 
Australia more secure online, the Australian 
Government has an important role to 
play in actively defending Australia from 
sophisticated malicious cyber actors. To 
achieve this, the Australian Government 
will target its cyber security efforts on 
the areas where it will make the most 
impact. In the shorter term, the initial 
focus is on setting expectations for critical 
infrastructure and systems of national 
significance (set out in further detail under 
‘Actions by businesses’). This will involve 
ensuring Australia has the right policies 
and capabilities in place to manage the 
highest consequence threats to Australia 
to protect the essential services on which 
all Australians depend for our way of life.
34	
Although Australia has been lucky to avoid 
a catastrophic cyber security incident, 
we are vulnerable to the cyber attacks 
experienced elsewhere in the world. 
Supporting the continuity of essential 
services in the face of disruptive or 
sophisticated attacks is a fundamental 
obligation for government. The loss of 
an essential service like electricity, water 
or transport could have devastating 
impacts across Australia far beyond the 
targeted business. Although more can be 
done to raise the overall security posture 
of critical infrastructure (see ‘Securing 
essential services’ section), some nation 
states or state-sponsored actors are so 
sophisticated that an attack may be 
beyond the capability of a single network 
owner to handle alone, irrespective of its 
size, expertise and best efforts. 
35	
The Australian Government must be 
ready to act in the national interest 
when its unique capabilities are needed, 
especially in emergency situations. 
In consultation with critical infrastructure 
owners and operators, the Australian 
Government will develop new powers 
proportionate to the consequences of 
a sophisticated and catastrophic cyber 
attack, accompanied by appropriate 
safeguards and oversight mechanisms. 
These powers will ensure the Australian 
Government can actively defend 
networks and help the private sector 
recover in the event of a cyber attack. 
The nature of this assistance will depend 
on the circumstances, but could include 
expert advice, direct assistance or the 
use of classified tools. This will reduce the 
potential down-time of essential services 
and the impact of cyber attacks on 
Australians. 
36	
The Australian Government will also work 
with businesses to consider legislative 
changes that set a minimum cyber 
security baseline across the economy. 
This consultation will consider multiple 
reform options, including:
—	
the role of privacy, consumer and 
data protection laws
—	
duties for company directors and 
other business entities
—	
obligations on manufacturers of 
internet connected devices.
This consultation will examine ways to 
simplify and reduce the cost of meeting 
any future minimum baseline.
22
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

37	
The Australian Government will strengthen 
its capacity to prevent or respond to 
malicious cyber activity, including in 
response to sophisticated actors. Through 
this Strategy, the Australian Government 
will invest $62.3 million in a classified 
national situational awareness capability 
to better enable government to understand 
and respond to cyber threats to critical 
infrastructure and other high priority 
networks. This will be complemented 
by increased incident reporting and 
near-real-time threat information from 
the most essential pieces of infrastructure 
as part of future regulatory requirements. 
To make use of all sources of threat 
information, the Australian Government 
will deliver an enhanced threat-sharing 
platform, enabling critical infrastructure 
operators to share intelligence about 
malicious cyber activity with government 
and other providers at machine speed, 
and block emerging threats as they occur. 
This Strategy will invest $118 million to 
expand ASD’s data science capabilities. 
The Australian Government will invest 
$66.5 million to assist Australia’s major 
critical infrastructure providers to assess 
vulnerabilities to enhance their cyber 
security posture. An additional 
$20.2 million will go to cutting-edge 
research laboratories so we can better 
understand threats to technologies that 
underpin Australia’s critical infrastructure 
systems on which businesses and home 
users increasingly rely. 
38	
This requires strong partnerships between 
businesses and governments. To support 
the partnership, the Australian Government 
will increase its investment in the JCSCs 
in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, 
and Adelaide, and expand the number 
of services available to our partners. 
Continuing and expanding the JCSCs 
was strongly supported during public 
consultation. Strengthened JCSCs will 
accommodate an increased number of 
cyber outreach officers, including from 
the Department of Home Affairs. These 
outreach officers will be a crucial link in 
developing strong partnerships and sharing 
actionable cyber security advice. 
39	
All JCSCs will include multi-classification 
facilities to accommodate a broader 
range of ACSC capabilities and classified 
engagement with law enforcement and 
trusted partners. The number of technical 
staff will also be increased, creating 
multi-disciplinary teams of experts who 
can provide additional operational and 
technical expertise across the nation. 
The work of the enhanced JCSCs will 
complement that of growing and vital 
private cyber security businesses.
40	 Although the cyber security of the tertiary 
education sector is primarily the tertiary 
education sector’s responsibility, the 
Australian Government is also investing 
$1.6 million to enhance the cyber security of 
Australian universities. This will fund a threat 
intelligence-sharing network, sector-wide 
threat modelling and a national cyber 
security forum that will meet three times 
a year. Strengthening the collective 
defences of universities against future 
threats will support our cyber skills agenda. 
The Australian Government welcomes 
the work that Australia’s Academic 
Research Network (AARNet) is doing to 
share threat intelligence within the tertiary 
education sector.
41	
The Australian Government will also work 
closely with businesses to prepare for 
cyber incidents by practising our incident 
response procedures. An expanded cyber 
security incident exercise program, led 
by the ACSC, will ensure that Australian 
businesses and governments have 
practised their incident responses ahead 
of time and are always strengthening 
their readiness and resilience. The 
Australian Government will work with state 
and territory governments on formally 
recognising businesses in governments’ 
incident response playbook, known 
as the Cyber Incident Management 
Arrangements. This will ensure that all parts 
of Australia’s society have clearly defined 
roles and responsibilities and know what to 
do in the case of a national cyber incident 
or emergency.
23
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Holding cyber criminals to account
42	
Tackling crime is just as important in the 
online world as it is in the physical world. 
Criminals from anywhere across the globe 
can use the internet to harm Australians 
with ease and at scale. To hold cyber 
criminals to account and prevent cyber 
crime, law enforcement agencies across 
Australia will need to work together. 
Building on the success of approaches to 
counter terrorism and child exploitation, 
this Strategy will encourage even greater 
cooperation across Australia and with 
international partners. The Australian 
Government will work with state and 
territory governments to prioritise our 
efforts and equip agencies with the 
capabilities to make a difference. The 
Australian Government will also bolster the 
Australian Federal Police’s (AFP) ability to 
investigate and prosecute cyber criminals, 
investing $89.9 million. This investment 
will enable the AFP to establish target 
development teams with partners, build 
technical cyber capabilities and enhance 
operational capacity. The Australian 
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre’s 
financial intelligence expertise will be 
harnessed to target the profits of cyber 
criminals. Building on the establishment 
of a countering foreign cyber criminals 
capability in 2019, the Australian 
Government will also further expand the 
ACSC’s ability to counter cyber crime 
actors offshore.
43	
Encryption is an important way of 
protecting consumer and business data, 
but the increasing use of the dark web and 
encryption technologies that allow people 
to remain anonymous online is challenging 
law enforcement agencies’ ability to 
protect our community. The dark web 
enables cyber criminals to broadcast child 
sexual exploitation and abuse, trade in 
stolen identities, traffic drugs and firearms, 
and plan terror attacks. These platforms 
make committing serious crimes at volume, 
and across borders, easier than ever before.
The Telecommunications and Other 
Legislation Amendment (Assistance and 
Access) Act introduced in 2018 has helped 
Australia’s law enforcement and security 
agencies, working with industry, tackle 
online criminal and terrorist threats. Through 
this Strategy, the Australian Government 
will ensure law enforcement agencies 
have appropriate legislative powers and 
technical capabilities to deter, disrupt 
and defeat the criminal exploitation of 
anonymising technology and the dark web. 
Identifying threats
44	 Australia’s law enforcement agencies 
face a continuous challenge to identify 
new threats before these threats 
harm Australians, and to respond to 
technological developments. 
The Australian Signals Directorate will 
recruit 500 additional intelligence and 
cyber security personnel at a cost of 
$469.7 million over 10 years. The Australian 
Government will invest $385.4 million in 
enabling and enhancing intelligence 
capabilities. In addition to holding cyber 
criminals and malicious actors to account, 
these steps will ensure that Australia 
remains a world leader in developing new 
and innovative approaches that enable 
all Australians to securely adopt new 
technology and access the benefits of 
the digital economy.
Government systems
45	
Governments also have a responsibility to 
lead by example. Shifting more government 
services online is making the lives of 
Australians easier. However, citizens need 
to have confidence that their data is safe, 
underscoring the need for government 
systems and data to be secure. This 
Strategy will drive long-term work by the 
Australian Government to strengthen the 
defences of Commonwealth public sector 
networks. The first priority is to centralise 
the management and operations of 
24
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

the large number of networks run by 
Australian Government agencies, including 
considering secure hubs. Centralisation 
could reduce the number of targets 
available to hostile actors such as nation 
states or state-sponsored adversaries, 
and allow the Australian Government to 
focus its cyber security investment on a 
smaller number of more secure networks. 
A centralised model will be designed to 
promote innovation and agility while still 
achieving economies of scale. 
46	
The centralisation of cyber security systems 
across government will be complemented 
by the work of Australian Government 
agencies to strengthen their cyber security 
and implement the ACSC’s Essential Eight 
mitigation strategies. This work will be 
informed and supported by the ACSC’s 
ongoing technical cyber security advice 
and guidance. This approach to the uplift 
of government systems will be designed to 
reduce the risk of compromise, and help 
to prevent the most common techniques 
used by malicious cyber actors. Australian 
government agencies will also put a 
renewed focus on policies and procedures 
to manage cyber security risks. Standard 
cyber security clauses will be included in 
Australian Government IT contracts.
The connection between 
cyber crime and identity theft
Many cyber threats are enabled by 
malicious actors concealing their 
identities using fake or stolen identity 
information. Personal information stolen 
from innocent Australians is widely 
available in thriving dark web markets, 
where it is bought and sold on an 
industrial scale by criminals looking to 
commit fraud or facilitate other illegal 
activities. For example, criminals use 
stolen identities to withdraw money from 
bank accounts, take out loans, apply 
for credit cards, or claim government 
benefits in another person’s name. 
Trusted digital identities 
promote cyber security
47	
To help protect Australians against 
identity crime, the Australian 
Government’s Digital Identity program 
gives people the choice to use a trusted 
digital identity credential, such as a 
myGovID, to access online services from 
participating government and private 
sector organisations. This will make 
accessing online services easier and safer 
for Australians, while giving organisations 
greater confidence in who they are 
dealing with online.
48	 By using trusted digital identity 
credentials to access multiple online 
services, people will not need to 
repeatedly re-verify their identities 
or maintain multiple passwords. 
This reduces the amount of personal 
information that needs to be shared 
with online service providers, helping to 
prevent identity theft and other forms of 
cyber crime. 
49	
Trusted digital identities need to be 
verified against government identity 
records such as passports, driver licences 
and birth certificates – documents 
Australians rely on every day to help 
prove their identities. The Australian 
Government will work with states and 
territories to update the National 
Identity Security Strategy to strengthen 
arrangements for issuing and managing 
these documents, maintain strong 
privacy safeguards, and further bolster 
our defences against identity and 
cyber crime.
25
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

International engagement
50	 Finally, governments have a responsibility 
to uphold existing international law and 
norms of responsible state behaviour in 
cyberspace. Australia will continue to 
encourage the international community 
to act responsibly online, including by 
complying with existing international law, 
domestic law and norms of responsible 
state behaviour. The Australian 
Government will ensure that Australia 
is not seen as a soft target and will 
continue to publicly call out countries 
when it is in our interests to do so. The 
Australian Government will match its 
public statements with action through a 
range of targeted and decisive responses 
against unacceptable intrusions or 
activity in line with Australia’s statement 
of principles on cyber deterrence:
We work to actively prevent cyber attacks, 
minimise damage, and respond to 
malicious cyber activity directed against 
our national interests. We deny and deter, 
while balancing the risk of escalation. 
Our actions are lawful and aligned with 
the values we seek to uphold, and will 
therefore be proportionate, always 
contextual, and collaborative. We can 
choose not to respond. 
51	
The Australian Government’s actions 
will strengthen the nation’s cyber 
security. Stronger obligations and 
partnerships will give us the best chance 
of disrupting or minimising sophisticated 
attacks. Bolstered law enforcement 
and intelligence capabilities will create 
a stronger deterrence against cyber 
criminals. Government systems on which 
all Australians rely will be hardened. The 
actions required of businesses will build 
on these initiatives.
Australia’s Cyber and Critical 
Technology International 
Engagement Strategy
The Australian Government defines 
critical technology as current and 
emerging technologies that have the 
capacity to significantly enhance or 
pose a risk to our national interest 
(prosperity, social cohesion or national 
security). Critical technology and 
cyberspace are becoming increasingly 
important aspects of international 
relations. They are intrinsically linked to 
our national prosperity and security; 
the protection and promotion of human 
rights and democracy; international 
stability; global economic prosperity; 
and sustainable development. 
The Australian Government is developing 
a Cyber and Critical Technology 
International Engagement Strategy. 
Building on the 2017 International Cyber 
Engagement Strategy, the next Cyber 
and Critical Technology International 
Engagement Strategy will provide 
a framework to guide Australia’s 
international engagement, to ensure 
cyberspace and critical technology 
support our goal of a safe, secure and 
prosperous Australia, Indo-Pacific and 
world. This includes partnerships to 
support the achievement of our cyber 
security goals by building international 
capacity and resilience to cyber security 
threats, cyber crime, online harms and 
disinformation. 
The Australian Government will place 
an increased focus on engaging 
internationally on the security of critical 
technologies. The nature of global supply 
chains means that Australia needs to take 
joint action with likeminded countries to 
ensure these critical technologies are not 
manipulated for malicious purposes.
26
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Working with international partners
The security and resilience of our allies, regional partners and the broader international 
community is vital to ensuring Australia’s own national security and prosperity. 
Australia is committed to supporting and sustaining international mechanisms that promote 
stability, and to working with partners on a voluntary basis to deter and respond to 
unacceptable behaviour in cyberspace. 
Australia contributes to forums such as the International Organization for Standardization 
and the International Telecommunication Union which develop international standards that 
contribute to a more secure cyberspace for all countries.
Awareness raising and capacity building helps ensure the peaceful use of technology, and will 
ultimately enhance our collective cyber resilience and thus deliver direct benefits for Australia. 
Some countries may require assistance in their efforts to: 
—	
improve the security of critical information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure
—	
develop technical skills and appropriate legislation, regulatory frameworks and strategies to 
fulfil their responsibilities
—	
bridge the divide between the security of ICT and its use. 
Building the capacity of our neighbours 
The Australian Government has already committed $60 million to support cyber capacity 
building in the Indo-Pacific region to champion an open, free and secure cyberspace. This 
includes a seven-year, $34 million Cyber Cooperation Program, working with government, 
industry, civil society and academia to enhance cyber resilience across the full spectrum of 
cyber affairs. The Cyber Cooperation Program is now also working to mitigate the impact of 
malicious cyber activity during COVID-19.
Australia has also committed to a four-year, $14 million Australia-Papua New Guinea 
(PNG) Cyber Security Cooperation initiative to enhance PNG’s cyber security frameworks 
and technical capability, and a four-year $12.7 million Australia-India Cyber and Critical 
Technology Partnership.
27
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Actions by businesses
“In our connected economy, an attack on one organisation can 
have impacts across customers and supply chains.”
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
52	
Cyber security is important to all 
businesses. It provides access to the digital 
economy and protects hard-earned 
profits, valuable intellectual property and 
sensitive customer data. Some businesses 
take cyber security more seriously than 
others. Given the private sector owns most 
of Australia’s data and networks, Australia 
will not be secure until all businesses take 
steps to protect themselves, their supply 
chains and their customers. 
Securing essential services
53	
The best way to protect Australians 
at scale is to secure our critical 
infrastructure. Through this Strategy, the 
Australian Government will work with 
owners and operators to uplift their cyber 
security and to actively defend networks, 
using both defensive and offensive tools. 
This is consistent with feedback from 
consultation on this Strategy about 
working together to better defend critical 
infrastructure. 
54	
The Australian Government takes 
seriously the need to protect our 
critical infrastructure and has already 
taken action to do so. The Australian 
Government introduced reforms 
in 2018 to manage threats to the 
telecommunications sector and certain 
electricity, water, gas and port assets. 
However, the threat environment is 
worsening. In response to this, the 
Australian Government is developing 
an enhanced regulatory framework for 
critical infrastructure and systems of 
national significance.
55	
The enhanced framework will uplift 
security and resilience in critical 
infrastructure sectors, combined with 
better identification and sharing of 
information about threats in order to 
make Australia’s critical infrastructure – 
whether owned or operated by industry 
or government – more resilient and 
secure. This approach will prioritise acting 
ahead of an incident wherever possible. 
56	
One size does not fit all. The framework 
will balance objectives for cyber, physical, 
personnel and supply chain protections 
across all sectors, while recognising 
sector-specific differences. This is why 
the framework will be built around 
principles-based outcomes, underpinned 
by guidance and advice proportionate 
to the risks and circumstances in each 
sector. Due to the interconnected nature 
of critical infrastructure sectors, even 
mature sectors will benefit from these 
changes and they should see an uplift in 
their supply chain as well as the networks 
and systems that they depend on.   
57	
This framework will apply to owners 
and operators of relevant critical 
infrastructure regardless of ownership 
arrangements. This creates an even 
playing field for owners and operators 
and maintains Australia’s existing open 
investment settings, ensuring businesses 
that take security seriously are not at a 
commercial disadvantage.
28
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

58	
Australia’s enhanced critical infrastructure 
security regulatory framework will clarify 
what infrastructure owners need to do to 
meet our minimum expectations of cyber 
security. It will include:
—	
an enforceable positive security 
obligation for designated critical 
infrastructure entities;
—	
enhanced cyber security obligations 
for those entities most important to 
the nation 
—	
Australian Government assistance 
for businesses in response to the 
most significant cyber attacks to 
Australian systems
—	
voluntary measures to strengthen 
engagement with businesses in 
relation to risk, and support an 
entity’s security uplift.
59	
This enhanced regulatory framework will 
be delivered through amendments to the 
Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018. 
Protecting critical infrastructure and systems of national significance
The Telecommunications Sector Security Reforms and Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018 
strengthen Australia’s protection against threats to the telecommunications sector and certain 
electricity, water, gas and port assets.
The Australian Government will build on this foundation to include other critical sectors that 
Australians rely on for our way of life. As part of these reforms, the Australian Government will 
introduce obligations for the owners of these regulated critical infrastructure assets, including 
further cyber specific obligations to protect our most critical systems.

Description: All entities within expanded Security of Critical Infrastructure 
Act 2018 designated critical infrastructure sectors
Framework elements: Government Assistance (directions and direct action)
Critical Infrastructure Entities
Whole of economy
Regulated Critical Infrastructure Entities
Description: Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018 designated critical 
infrastructure entities
Framework elements: Positive Security Obligation; Government Assistance 
(directions and direct action)
Systems of National Significance
Description: The subset of critical infrastructure entities of highest criticality
Framework elements: Enhanced Cyber Security Obligations; Positive 
Security Obligation; Government Assistance (directions and direct action)


















These reforms will also recognise that although entities have a responsibility to take steps to 
protect themselves and the services they deliver, the Australian Government has an obligation 
to act in the national interest when the threats or consequences are too high for individual 
entities to manage without its unique capabilities.
29
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

60	 At the other end of the scale, SMEs are 
especially vulnerable to cyber security 
threats. Feedback from consultation 
shows SMEs often lack the resources or 
expertise to defend themselves and that 
there can be a large impact on regional 
communities when cyber criminals 
target SMEs. This Strategy includes an 
$8.3 million Cyber Security Connect and 
Protect Program, which will assist SMEs 
through tailored advice and assistance 
from trusted sources. 
61	
The Australian Government will also provide 
online training and a 24/7 helpdesk for 
SMEs that needs cyber security advice 
or assistance. Government and large 
businesses will assist small businesses to 
upgrade their cyber security and grow 
their cyber security awareness. The 
Australian Government will encourage 
large businesses and services providers to 
provide small businesses with cyber security 
information and tools as part
of ‘bundles’ of secure services, such as 
threat-blocking, antivirus and cyber 
security awareness training. Integrating 
cyber security products into other service 
offerings will help protect SMEs at scale and 
recognises that many businesses cannot 
employ dedicated cyber security staff. All of 
these programs will continue to be brought 
together on cyber.gov.au, so that SMEs 
can quickly find the Australian Government 
assistance that best meets their needs.
Supporting SMEs
The Australian Government will prioritise support for SMEs through a number of key initiatives: 
—	
A $12.3 million expansion to the ACSC’s 24/7 cyber security hotline will enhance the provision of 
cyber security advice and technical assistance.
—	
The $8.3 million Cyber Security Connect and Protect Program will equip trusted organisations 
to raise the cyber security of SMEs in their local area.
—	
The placement of outreach officers in Joint Cyber Security Centres will support SMEs.
—	
Supporting the roll-out of threat-blocking technology will prevent known malicious cyber 
threats from reaching Australian consumers and businesses.
—	
The ACSC Small Business Cyber Security Guide provides tailored advice to protect against the 
most common cyber security incidents.
—	
ACSC-produced Step-by-Step and Quick Wins Guides provide practical instructions with 
visual aids outlining actions SMEs can take to protect themselves.
—	
The ACSC Stay Smart Online Program promotes best practice cyber security advice and 
encourages businesses to protect themselves online.
—	
Toolkits published on cyber.gov.au will help SMEs raise cyber security awareness among their 
staff members.
—	
A dedicated online cyber security training program hosted on cyber.gov.au will help upskill 
SMEs and their staff members.
—	
Law enforcement will have strengthened capabilities to identify and disrupt cyber criminals 
targeting Australian businesses.
30
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

“Today, cyberattacks from increasingly sophisticated actors 
threaten organisations across every sector, and whether a large 
ASX 100 company or a local bakery, organisations of all sizes need 
to take steps to limit the dangers posed by these threats.”
Microsoft
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
5	 NortonLifeLock (2020), The future of IoT: 10 predictions about the Internet of Things, available at https://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-iot-
5-predictions-for-the-future-of-iot.html; Business Insider (2020), A look at examples of IoT devices and their business applications in 2020, 
available at https://www.businessinsider.com/internet-of-things-devices-examples?r=AU&IR=T
62	
Certain businesses can reduce the 

number of threats entering Australia by 
automatically blocking known malicious 
content. This solution that will protect 
Australians and Australian businesses 
at speed and scale. Over the life of this 
Strategy, the Australian Government 
will support businesses to implement 
threat-blocking technology that can 
automatically protect citizens and 
businesses from known malware and 
trojans. The Australian Government 
will also consider how it can provide 
legislative and any other assistance 
to telecommunications providers 
implementing this technology.  
As part of this initiative, the Australian 
Government will invest $12.5 million for 
the ACSC to provide Australia’s major 
telecommunications providers with 
information about known malicious 
websites, malware, phishing campaigns 
and online scams to boost providers’ 
ability to block threats at scale.  
This funding will support industry 
partnership, research and development 
of new capabilities to detect and block 
threats at scale, reducing the volume of 
cyber threats impacting Australians so 
they can focus on running their 
businesses and building the economy. 
Cleaner Pipes initiative
In May 2020, Telstra announced its Cleaner 
Pipes initiative, which upscales Telstra’s 
Domain Name System (DNS) filtering, to 
automatically block millions of malware 
communications as they try to cross 
Telstra’s infrastructure every week. 
Telstra has been trialling this initiative for 
12 months, including blocking the command 
and control communications of botnets 
and malware and stopping downloads 
of remote access trojans, backdoors 
and banking trojans. Cleaner Pipes 
complements similar initiatives focused on 
reducing malicious SMS and scam calls; 
Telstra currently blocks more than half a 
million scam calls per month from reaching 
customers. The Australian Government is 
working with businesses to support the 
roll-out of this solution to more Australians. 
Securing products and services
63	
Australians are connecting to the internet 
in more ways than ever before. By 2030, 
it is estimated that there will be more 
than 21 billion Internet of Things devices 
connected to the internet globally, with 
the highest estimations predicting over 
64 billion devices.5 This includes personal 
devices like smartwatches, fridges and 
baby monitors; health devices such as 
pacemakers and blood-glucose monitors; 
and industrial devices that can drive 
business efficiencies. 
31
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

64	
To support businesses in taking action 
to protect themselves and their 
customers, the Australian Government 
will release the voluntary Code of 
Practice: Securing the Internet of Things 
for Consumers, to inform businesses 
about the cyber security features 
expected of internet-connected devices 
available in Australia. The 13 principles 
in the voluntary Code of Practice will 
signal to manufacturers the importance 
of protecting consumers. Adoption of 
the Code of Practice, together with 
associated guidance material produced 
by the ACSC, will benefit Australians 
and SMEs by increasing the number of 
secure products available for purchase. 
The Australian Government will provide 
consumers with information about 
what to take into consideration when 
purchasing Internet of Things devices. 
65	
Similar to steps taken in the United 
Kingdom, the Australian Government 
will co-design  supply chain principles 
for decision makers and suppliers, 
to encourage security-by-design; 
transparency; and autonomy and 
integrity in investment, procurement 
and security. The Australian Government 
will build these principles into 
decision-making practices, supporting 
competition and diversity in the 
market. To keep guidance up to date 
as technology and threats continue to 
evolve, the Australian Government will 
continue to monitor and build on existing 
government initiatives that promote 
innovation in sovereign cyber security 
research and development. AustCyber 
is well placed to assure continued 
commercialisation and scaling of cyber 
security capabilities that support our 
nation’s needs.
66	
In making decisions about what products 
and services they purchase, consumers 
play an important role in encouraging 
businesses to build cyber security into their 
offerings. The Australian Government will 
continue to assess whether consumers 
have the information they need to make 
informed cyber security choices when 
purchasing products and services. 
If voluntary advice and guidance like 
the Code of Practice is not enough to 
drive change, then additional steps may 
need to be considered. The Australian 
Government will establish a Cyber Security 
Best Practice Regulation Task Force to 
work with businesses and international 
partners to consider options for better 
protecting customers by ensuring cyber 
security is built into digital products, 
services and supply chains. This reflects 
community expectations of product safety, 
and the risk of vulnerabilities spreading 
due to the increasing interconnection 
between devices. 
Growing a cyber skilled 
workforce
67	
A strong workforce of skilled cyber 
security professionals is a key enabler of 
Australia’s digital economy and security. 
To support businesses in undertaking 
these actions, this Strategy includes 
a Cyber Security National Workforce 
Growth Program that will assist businesses 
and academia to grow the cyber skilled 
workforce of the future. Growing the cyber 
security skills pipeline will ensure all critical 
infrastructure owners and operators and 
businesses have greater access to skilled 
cyber security professionals with the right 
skills to meet demand. This complements 
the steps the Australian Government has 
already taken to invest in the growth of 
the Defence cyber workforce.
32
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

68	
Greater opportunities will be provided 
to Australians seeking to train for a 
world-class career in cyber security. 
The Cyber Security National Workforce 
Growth Program will be underpinned by 
a $26.5 million Cyber Skills Partnerships 
Innovation Fund, which will encourage 
businesses and academia to partner 
together to find innovative new ways 
to improve cyber security skills. 
Activities that will be eligible under 
the Fund include:
—	
scholarships
—	
apprenticeships, or 
apprenticeship-style courses in 
higher education
—	
development and delivery of 
specialist cyber security courses 
for professionals
—	
retraining initiatives, to help existing 
professionals in other disciplines 
transition to cyber security roles
—	
training or professional 
development for teachers and 
board executives, including through 
practical partnerships or exchanges 
with industry
—	
internships, cadetships, work 
experience and staff exchanges
—	
digital training platforms and student 
delivered cyber security services
—	
any other innovative idea to meet 
the needs of businesses.
69	
The Cyber Security National Workforce 
Growth Program seeks to grow cyber 
security skills at all stages of education, 
including primary, secondary and tertiary. 
It will inspire the next generation of cyber 
security experts and equip teachers to 
include cyber security in their classroom 
lessons. The ACSC will grow its education, 
skills, training, mentoring and coaching 
programs, including specialised programs 
for women who are still underrepresented 
in the sector. The Australian Government 
also intends to work with businesses and 
academia on the best way to ensure 
university courses meet employer needs, 
building on international examples. This 
includes considering how cyber security 
can be more consistently embedded in 
other disciplines, such as engineering 
and data science. Strengthening the links 
between government, businesses and the 
education sector is particularly important 
because of the speed of change in cyber 
security. Cyber security evolves much 
faster than other sectors, as technology 
changes and malicious actors adapt their 
tactics accordingly.
70	
Businesses and the community need to have 
confidence in the cyber security industry. 
The Australian Government will continue 
to work with businesses on the best way 
to promote the cyber security profession 
and ensure there are clear professional 
standards for practitioners, and more 
consistency in the market for consumers. In 
the medium to longer term, this could involve 
exploring whether there is a need for cyber 
security accreditation frameworks, including 
how these would map against other existing 
licensing and professional accreditation 
frameworks. To provide consistency across 
the cyber security sector, this could be 
accompanied by professional competency 
requirements for maintaining accreditation. 
The Australian Government will work with 
businesses and international partners to 
understand if this would be valuable, and 
the best way for the cyber security sector 
to deliver and maintain these frameworks, 
including through close engagement with 
international partners.
“A globally competitive Australian cyber security sector will 
ultimately underpin the future success of every industry in the 
national economy.”
AustCyber
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
33
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

The cyber security sector offers diverse opportunities
Cyber security is one of the fastest 
growing sectors in Australia and 
worldwide. Its direct economic impact 
in 2019-20 is estimated at $15.7 billion in 
revenue, employing 19,475 people.6 Rapid 
technological advancement and the 
evolving threat environment will continue 
to generate demand in the cyber security 
sector. AustCyber forecasts that almost 
17,000 new jobs will be needed to 2026.7
The cyber security sector is 
vital to economic growth
Digital activity in 2019–20 directly 
contributed: $317 billion in gross output to 
the Australian economy; $105 billion (5.5%) 
to Australia’s GDP; and 527,726 jobs to 
the Australian economy.6 Cyber security 
enables the digital economy to grow and 
innovate, which is critical to Australia’s 
prosperity and recovery from COVID-19, 
as more people and businesses move 
online to create and deliver services 
and goods.
Work from anywhere
Cyberspace is not bound by geography. 
Working in cyber security means that 
you do not have to be locked in to a 
single jurisdiction. Opportunities exist for 
Australian cyber security businesses to 
sell their solutions to offshore buyers and 
attract global investors.
Competitive wages
AustCyber’s Cyber Security Sector 
Competitiveness Plan states that wages 
are high across the cyber security 
profession with a $12,000 average wage 
premium paid for a cyber security worker 
over an IT worker. Roles in management 
and leadership, and those that involve 
designing and building cyber systems, 
are currently commanding the highest 
salaries, with average wage premiums of 
more than $20,000 above general IT.7
6	 AustCyber (2020), Australia’s Digital Trust Report 2020, available at https://www.austcyber.com/resource/digitaltrustreport2020 
7	 AustCyber (2019), Australia’s Cyber Security Competitiveness Plan: 2019 Update, available at https://www.austcyber.com/resource/austr
alias-cyber-security-sector-competitiveness-plan-2019
You don’t need to be an IT expert
One of the biggest misconceptions about a career in 
cyber security is that it requires a background in IT. 
Cyber security is a broad sector that encompasses 
technical roles, policy, risk management, marketing, 
engagement and more. 
There are courses relating to cyber security available 
in every state and territory, with more than 850 courses 
available Australia-wide. 
Further information on cyber security courses 
is available at: www.austcyber.com/educate/
career-paths-and-opportunities
Sovereign capabilities benefit us all
The value of market diversity and certainty in supply 
chains has become more apparent than ever as 
COVID-19 has focused attention on the risk of 
over-reliance on single markets. This presents business 
opportunities for Australian sovereign cyber capability. 
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Australian 
Government will continue to work with industry and 
academia to encourage the development of new 
sovereign Australian cyber capabilities and companies. 
The Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre is 
uniquely placed to play a key role in helping 
governments and key stakeholders bring this Strategy 
to life by driving relevant and innovative research to 
build Australia’s cyber security capacity and capability.
Interested in working in cyber security?
ASD is the Australian Government’s eminent authority 
responsible for three critical missions, namely the 
collection of signals intelligence, offensive cyber actions 
and the strengthening of Australia’s cyber security. 
ASD offers entry level career opportunities through the 
ASD Graduate Program across almost every discipline. 
ASD also offers apprenticeships through the Australian 
Government Digital Apprenticeship Program for those 
who are looking for a new and exciting career, including 
students who are currently studying or have completed 
their year 12 certificate, people studying at a CIT or 
TAFE, and those with a passion for IT. 
Further information is available at 
www.asd.gov.au/careers
34
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Actions by the community
“An informed and educated consumer about the cyber threat 
landscape could be the most efficacious program that government 
could initiate.” 
Cisco
Public submission to the Cyber Security Strategy 2020
71	
Most cyber security incidents have an 
element of human error. This means it is 
critical that all Australians know how to 
stay secure online, especially as using 
new technology does not come naturally 
to everyone. This Strategy will empower 
Australians by providing the tools to do so 
in a secure way. 
72	
There are several things that Australians 
can, and should, do to be secure online. 
The ACSC will continue to provide best 
practice cyber security advice and 
assistance through the one-stop-shop 
cyber.gov.au. Cyber.gov.au provides all 
the information individuals need to know 
about being cyber secure and serves as an 
excellent foundation for further initiatives 
to build cyber security resilience within the 
community. Accessing and implementing 
this information are actions the community 
can take to increase their cyber security. 
In addition, there is growing private sector 
cyber security expertise that can assist 
in staying secure online across a range of 
services, such as the provision of anti-virus 
software to in-depth cyber security advice 
and response.
73	
Through this Strategy, the Australian 
Government will build on existing advice 
to make sure messages about cyber 
security reach more Australians more often. 
The Australian Government will invest in a 
new public awareness raising campaign, 
delivered in coordination with campaigns 
about online safety (see the case study 
below). The Australian Government will 
also provide a comprehensive online 
cyber security training program for small 
businesses, older Australians and Australian 
families, delivered through cyber.gov.au. 
What’s the difference 
between online safety and 
cyber security?
As Australians spend more time online, 
they need to protect themselves from 
cyber threats and illegal and harmful content 
and behaviour. 
Cyber security includes helping Australians 
to be secure online by protecting data, 
information, devices and networks from 
malicious actors. The ACSC, via cyber.gov.au, 
is the main point of contact for the public on 
cyber security.  
Online safety includes protecting individuals, 
families, and communities from harmful 
content and behaviours such as cyber 
bulling, image-based abuse and illegal 
and harmful online content. The eSafety 
Commissioner, via esafety.gov.au, is the main 
point of contact for the public on online 
safety. With more Australians online as a 
result of COVID-19, the Australian Government 
has invested an additional $10 million to 
boost eSafety’s investigations and support 
teams so help is available to Australians 
when they encounter harmful content and 
behaviours online.
The Australian Government recognises 
the need to provide clear and simple 
advice about how to be secure and safe 
online. Through this Strategy, Australian 
Government departments will work closely 
together to provide clear advice on both 
online safety and cyber security. 
The Australian Government will also make 
it easier for businesses interested in both 
online safety and cyber security to engage 
with government.
35
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

74	
Any Australian that needs cyber security 
advice or support should reach out to the 
experts as soon as they can. One of the 
main ways to get cyber security help is by 
contacting the ACSC’s 24/7 hotline. Early 
action can prevent an incident, or reduce 
the harm if it has already occurred. The 
ACSC will receive more funding so this 
hotline can provide a greater number of 
services and increase its capacity.
75	
Through this Strategy, the Australian 
Government will prioritise support to 
victims of cyber crime. Reporting cyber 
crime incidents through the ReportCyber 
website is an important way for the 
community to help us know the full 
extent to which cyber criminals are 
harming Australians. Being a victim of a 
cyber crime can be traumatic, but the 
impact can be reduced with the right 
help. Another way to get help is through 
the free specialist identity and cyber 
crime support service IDCARE. IDCARE 
is able to provide tailored, hands-on 
support to victims when they need it 
most. This Strategy will provide more 
funding to victim support services to 
help a growing number of people who 
need their assistance. By taking the 
above actions, government, businesses 
and the community will create a more 
secure online world for Australians, their 
businesses and the essential services 
upon which we all depend.
Tips to secure your Internet 
of Things device
The Australian community can take 
action to make informed purchasing 
decisions. Consumers should ask the 
following questions when purchasing 
internet-connected devices to reduce 
the risk of purchasing an insecure device.
Before purchasing an Internet of 
Things device
—	
Is the device made by a well-known 
reputable company and sold by a 
well-known reputable store? 
—	
Is it possible to change the password?
—	
Does the manufacturer provide 
software updates?
—	
What data will the device collect and 
who will the data be shared with?
—	
Does the device do only what you 
want it to do?
Setting up an Internet of Things 
device
—	
Does the device need to be 
connected to the internet?
—	
Is the device in a secure location?
—	
Do I change the default username 
and password?
—	
Is my Wi-Fi network set up securely, 
and does it have a secure password?
—	
Are unnecessary device features 
turned off?
Further advice on how to stay secure 
online is available at cyber.gov.au.
36
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

This Strategy’s work does not end here
Both government and businesses have finite resources. The actions outlined in this Strategy 
address the most urgent issues. Technology is constantly changing; measures designed to 
improve security in today’s online world can be quickly overtaken by new technologies, systems, 
software and applications.
Australia cannot therefore set and forget, especially as technology and threats continue to 
evolve. The Australian Government will continue to work with businesses and the community 
to ensure that all continue to take actions to create a more secure online world for Australians, 
their businesses and the essential services upon which we all depend. 
The standing Industry Advisory Committee (see ‘Implementation and measuring progress’) will 
play a key role in advising the Minister what specific actions to take as part of this Strategy in 
the longer-term.
The Minister will periodically update this Strategy’s Action Plan (on the following pages) and 
report to the Australian Government and the community on measures to continually enhance 
Australia’s cyber security.
37
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

38
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020
How do I stay secure online?
PRIVACY
Be wary of what is shared 
and with whom
SUSPICIOUS MESSAGING
Treat any unexpected 
messages with caution
ONLINE FINANCE 
AND PAYMENTS
Keep financial details from 
prying eyes
BACKUPS AND PROTECTION
Backup and update 
for safety
PASSWORDS
Create strong passwords
to be secure
SURFING SAFELY
Avoid malware—keep to 
trusted websites
TABLETS AND 
MOBILES
Be mindful when 
using free Wi-Fi
REPORTING
Keep everyone safe by 
reporting scams

Action plan
Initiative
Description
Who benefits? 
Actions by governments
Protect critical 
infrastructure 
in a national 
emergency
The Australian Government will introduce new laws to 
make sure Australia can recover quickly from a cyber 
security emergency. This will include providing reasonable 
and proportionate directions to businesses to minimise the 
impact of an incident and taking direct action to protect 
systems during an emergency.
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and systems 
of national significance will 
be able to quickly recover 
in the event of a significant 
cyber incident.
—	 All businesses and citizens 
will benefit from essential 
services being protected  
or restored as quickly  
as possible
Enhance incident  
response  
procedures 
The Australian Government will invest $10.0 million for 
an expanded National Exercise Program that will bring 
Commonwealth, state and territory government agencies 
together with private sector organisations to plan and 
prepare for cyber security incidents. 
The Australian Government will also work with states and 
territories to expand standard cyber security incident 
procedures to formally recognise and plan for business 
contributions in responding to a major incident.  
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and 
businesses will be involved in 
national incident response 
procedures, improving their 
ability to recover.
—	 The essential services that 
Australians rely on every 
day will be quickly restored 
in the event of a significant 
cyber incident.  
39
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
Description
Who benefits? 
Bolster law 
enforcement 
capabilities, 
including on the 
dark web
The Australian Government will invest $124.9 million to 
strengthen law enforcement’s counter cyber crime 
capabilities. This includes an investment of $89.9 million 
in the AFP to set up target development teams and 
bolster its ability to go after cyber criminals. This will 
be complemented by the use of the Australian 
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre’s specialist 
financial intelligence expertise to target the profits of 
cyber criminals. 
The Australian Government will ensure it has 
fit-for-purpose powers and capabilities to discover, 
target, investigate and disrupt cyber crime, including on 
the dark web. 
The Australian Government will invest over $31.6 million to 
extend and expand the ACSC’s ability to counter cyber 
crime actors offshore and provide technical advice and 
assistance to Commonwealth, state and territory law 
enforcement agencies in identifying and disrupting cyber 
criminals. This builds on the Australian Government’s 
$40.0 million countering foreign cyber criminals 
election commitment.
Combined, these initiatives will enable government to take 
the fight to foreign actors that seek to target Australians.   
—	 Cyber criminals will be 
deterred from targeting 
Australians, reducing 
the cost of cyber crime 
and strengthening the 
Australian economy.
—	 Australians will be better 
protected from cyber crime.
Harden Australian 
Government IT
The Australian Government will strengthen defences 
of its networks by centralising their management and 
operation, including considering secure hubs. This 
centralisation seeks to reduce opportunities for malicious 
actors to target smaller agencies with less secure IT, 
and will increase opportunities to focus the Australian 
Government’s cyber security investment. 
Standard cyber security clauses will be in government 
IT contracts.
Australian government agencies will also put a renewed 
focus on policies and procedures to manage cyber 
security risks.
—	 Government IT systems, 
as systems of national 
significance, will be 
more secure.
—	 Businesses and citizens will 
be confident that their data 
is more secure.
Improve threat 
information sharing
The Australian Government will invest $35.3 million through 
the ACSC to deliver a new partner portal coupled with a 
multi-directional threat-sharing platform.
The Australian Government has also invested $1.6 million 
to enhance the cyber security of Australian universities. 
This will fund a threat intelligence-sharing network, 
sector-wide threat modelling and a national cyber 
security forum that will meet three times a year.  
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and 
businesses will have 
increased access to threat 
information, allowing them 
to better prepare for and 
defend against cyber 
threats. 
—	 Less sophisticated malicious 
cyber activity will be 
stopped before it reaches 
businesses and households.
40
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
Description
Who benefits? 
Uphold existing 
international 
law and norms 
of resposibility 
state behaviour in 
cyberspace
The Australian Government will deter malicious activity 
by imposing stronger consequences for those who act 
contrary to existing international law and agreed norms 
when it is in Australia’s national interest to do so.
—	 Malicious nation states 
and state-sponsored 
actors will be deterred from 
targeting Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and systems of 
national significance.
—	 Australia as a whole will 
become a less desirable 
target for malicious 
state-based cyber activity, 
reducing the cost on our 
economy, and upholding our 
security and sovereignty.
Strengthen 
cyber security 
partnerships
The Australian Government will invest $67.9 million to 
expand the JCSC program. A broader range of ACSC 
staff and capabilities will be available to enhance 
collaboration with and support for state, territory and local 
governments, industry partners and academia across the 
country. The Australian Government will invest $8.2 million 
to establish a Department of Home Affairs presence at 
each JCSC to provide a whole-of-government approach 
to cyber security engagement.  
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure, businesses 
and government agencies 
will have access to a 
collaborative forum 
to improve their cyber 
security practices.
Clarify cyber 
security obligations 
for Australian 
businesses
In line with advice from the Industry Advisory Panel and 
stakeholder feedback, the Australian Government will 
work with businesses on possible legislative changes 
that clarify the obligations for businesses that are not 
critical infrastructure to protect themselves and their 
customers from cyber security threats. This consultation 
will consider multiple reform options, including the role 
of privacy and consumer protection laws, and duties for 
company directors. 
—	 Australian businesses will have 
clarity about what they have 
to do to protect themselves 
and their customers.
—	 Consumers will have 
increased confidence in 
the security of products 
and services.
Stay ahead of the 
technology curve
The Australian Government will invest $118.0 million to 
expand its data science capabilities, ensuring Australia 
remains at the forefront of the technological 
advancements in cyber security.
The Australian Government will also invest $20.2 million 
to establish cutting-edge research laboratories to better 
understand threats to emerging technology.
Five hundred additional intelligence and cyber security 
personnel will be recruited at a cost of $469.7 million over 
10 years. 
The Australian Government will invest $385.4 million to 
enable and enhance intelligence capabilities.
—	 Staying ahead of the 
technological curve will 
ensure Australia is able 
to adapt to emerging 
cyber security threats, 
improving national resilience 
and creating economic 
opportunities for Australia 
cyber security businesses.
Actions by businesses
Improve baseline 
security for critical 
infrastructure
The Australian Government will implement minimum 
cyber security requirements for operators of critical 
infrastructure and systems of national significance. 
The Australian Government will also refine incident 
reporting for compromises and near-misses that meet a 
certain threshold.
To complement this work and as part of the Australian 
Government’s election commitment, the ACSC will receive 
$66.5 million to assist Australia’s major critical infrastructure 
providers assess their networks for vulnerabilities and to 
enhance their cyber security posture.
The Australian Government will also invest $62.3 million 
to deliver a national situational awareness capability to 
better enable the ACSC to understand and respond to 
cyber threats on a national scale.
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and systems of 
national significance will be 
more secure.
—	 All businesses and citizens 
that rely on critical 
infrastructure will benefit 
from continued access to 
essential services.
41
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
Description
Who benefits? 
Uplift the cyber 
security of SMEs
The $8.3 million Cyber Security Connect and Protect 
Program will equip trusted organisations like chambers of 
commerce and business associations to raise the cyber 
security of SMEs in their local area. 
—	 Australia’s economy will 
be strengthened and 
more resilient through the 
improved cyber security 
of SMEs.
Create a more 
secure Internet of 
Things
The Australian Government will release the voluntary Code 
of Practice on the security of the Internet of Things that 
will make the devices used by households and businesses 
more cyber secure.
—	 Internet of Things products 
in Australia will have 
improved cyber security, 
reducing costs on Australia’s 
economy currently borne by 
device vulnerabilities.
—	 Consumers will have greater 
access to secure Internet 
of Things devices, reducing 
their exposure to malicious 
cyber activity. 
Grow a skilled 
workforce
The $50.0 million Cyber Security National Workforce 
Growth Program will grow the pipeline of skilled, trusted 
and job ready cyber security workers in business and 
government. The following four elements are included in 
the Program.
A $26.5 million Skills Partnership Innovation Fund will 
create new opportunities for businesses and academia 
to partner on innovative skills projects that directly meet 
employers’ skills needs. 
The ACSC will receive $6.3 million to grow its education, 
skills, training, mentoring and coaching programs, 
including specialised programs for women.
The Australian Government will invest $14.9 million in 
Questacon, enabling it to design challenges and teacher 
training that prepare primary, secondary and tertiary 
students for a career in cyber security.
$2.5 million will be allocated to enhanced data collection 
on the cyber security skills shortage.
The Cyber Security National Workforce Growth Program 
complements the $40.0 million invested by the Australian 
Government as part of their election commitment to grow 
the Defence cyber workforce.
These initiatives will be further strengthened by the 
Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business’s 
announcement of new, fast-tracked training qualifications 
for the ICT sector to further equip Australia’s workforce 
with cyber security and digital skills.
—	 Australia’s critical 
infrastructure and 
businesses will have greater 
access to skilled cyber 
security professionals, 
strengthening their cyber 
security practices.
—	 Australians will have new 
opportunities to train for 
a world class career in 
cyber security.
Block threats 
automatically
Over the life of this Strategy, the Australian Government 
will support businesses to implement threat blocking 
technology that can automatically protect citizens 
from known malicious cyber threats. The Australian 
Government will consider how it can provide legislative 
certainty to telecommunications providers implementing 
this technology.
The Australian Government will also invest $12.5 million 
in new strategic mitigation and disruption options. This 
funding will support industry partnerships on, research into 
and development of new capabilities to detect and block 
threats at scale, to prevent malicious cyber activity from 
ever reaching millions of Australians.
—	 Australian businesses and 
households will benefit as 
threats are blocked before 
reaching them.
42
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
Description
Who benefits? 
Actions by the community
Access guidance 
and information on 
cyber security
The Australian Government expects the community 
to act on best practice advice from the ACSC on how 
to be secure online. Under this Strategy, the Australian 
Government will continue to raise awareness about 
cyber security risks. The Australian Government will invest 
$4.9 million in a public awareness campaign targeting 
vulnerable Australians. 
The Australian Government will work with large businesses 
such as banks and internet service providers to ensure 
that SMEs have access to cyber security information in 
the normal course of running their business. The Australian 
Government will develop toolkits that SMEs can use to 
raise the cyber security awareness of their staff. The 
Australian Government will encourage big businesses to 
provide these toolkits to small businesses as part of a 
secure bundle of services.
The ACSC will provide online cyber security training for 
SMEs, older Australians and families. 
This also complements the $10.0 million the Australian 
Government has invested to boost eSafety’s 
investigations and support teams so help is available to 
Australians when they encounter harmful content and 
behaviours online.
—	 Greater community 
awareness will reduce the 
cost of malicious cyber 
activity for businesses 
and strengthen the 
Australian economy.
—	 Greater community 
awareness will reduce the 
effectiveness of malicious 
cyber activity on Australian 
households, protecting 
families from harm.
Access help and 
support when 
needed
All Australians should access help and support if they are 
unsure about how to be secure online, or if they have been 
the victim of a cyber crime.
The Australian Government will invest $58.3 million to 
enhance customer engagement channels and 
$12.3 million to extend the 24/7 cyber security helpdesk to 
SMEs and families. This will enhance the provision of cyber 
security advice and technical assistance to all Australians, 
improve the ReportCyber incident reporting tool, and 
provide additional online resources, and practical, tailored 
advice and information for all Australians. This also 
complements the Australian Government’s $26.0 million 
investment to support the ACSC to expand its assistance 
to the SMEs and the community.
The Australian Government will also provide $6.1 million to 
bolster services to victims of identity and cyber crime.
—	 Victims of cyber crime, 
including SMEs, will have 
greater access to support 
services to more effectively 
recover from an incident. 
Make informed 
purchasing 
decisions
All consumers need to make smart cyber security 
decisions when purchasing digital devices. Through this 
Strategy the Australian Government will increase the 
amount of information available for consumers about 
what to look for when buying a product. This information 
will be available on cyber.gov.au. 
In the longer-term, the Australian Government will 
consider whether additional steps are needed to inform 
consumers, such as cyber security product labelling. 
—	 Consumers will benefit by 
knowing what cyber security 
features to look out for when 
buying a digital device.
43
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Implementation and 
measuring progress
76	
The Australian Government recognises 
the importance of robust strategy 
implementation and evaluation 
arrangements for this Strategy. 
77	
The Minister for Home Affairs has 
primary responsibility for delivering 
this Strategy, with support from other 
ministers as required. A Cyber Security 
Strategy Delivery Board, led by a 
senior Home Affairs official, will 
be responsible for day-to-day 
implementation of this Strategy. 
78	
An Industry Advisory Committee will 
also be established to guide the 
implementation of this Strategy. The 
Industry Advisory Committee will provide 
ongoing advice about the best ways 
to address Australia’s cyber security 
challenges, and will report directly 
to the Minister for Home Affairs. The 
Industry Advisory Committee will make 
public reports about the progress of this 
Strategy. This builds on the success of the 
Industry Advisory Panel that assisted in 
developing this Strategy. 
Metrics
Initiative
How the Australian Government will measure success
Actions by governments
Protect critical infrastructure in a 
national emergency
—	 Arrangements are in place for the Australian Government to respond to a 
cyber security emergency in a timely and effective manner.
—	 There is increased visibility of threats to critical infrastructure and systems 
of national significance, with information available in near-real-time for 
those who need it to actively defend networks.
Enhance incident 
response procedures 
—	 Updated Cyber Incident Management Arrangements outline how 
governments and businesses will increase their readiness to respond 
collectively to a significant national incident. 
—	 More government agencies and private sector organisations have 
strengthened their readiness and resilience.
44
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
How the Australian Government will measure success
Bolster law enforcement capabilities, 
including on the dark web
—	 Through enhanced capabilities and coordination, the Australian Federal 
Police, Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission and the ACSC identify 
and disrupt more cyber crime targets. 
—	 Agencies have the authorities they need to discover, target, investigate 
and disrupt cyber crime and cyber-enabled crime.
—	 More responses to online crimes are coordinated between the Australian 
Government, states and territories. 
Harden Australian Government IT
—	 Centralisation of Australian Government IT networks makes it easier to 
defend against malicious activity. 
Improve threat information sharing
—	 Government and businesses have increased visibility of cyber threats in 
near real-time. 
—	 There is increased two-way flow of cyber security information.
Uphold existing international law 
and norms of responsible state 
behaviour in cyberspace
—	 Australia’s response to unacceptable behaviour in cyberspace aligns 
with international law and norms of responsible state behaviour 
in cyberspace.
—	 A new Cyber and Critical Technology International Engagement Strategy 
is implemented.
Strengthen cyber security 
partnerships
—	 Customer experience survey data indicates effective partnerships 
between businesses and government.
Clarify cyber security obligations for 
Australian businesses
—	 Consultation is undertaken on possible future reforms to clarify cyber 
security obligations for Australian businesses.
Stay ahead of the technology curve
—	 The Australian Government has sovereign research capability to assess 
vulnerabilities in emerging technology.
Actions by businesses
Improve baseline security for critical 
infrastructure
—	 There are clear cyber security requirements for critical infrastructure 
providers regardless of ownership arrangements.
—	 Government has timely access to information about cyber security 
incidents and near-misses.
—	 Critical infrastructure providers are supported to improve their 
cyber security.
Uplift the cyber security of SMEs
—	 An increasing number of small businesses are improving their cyber 
security practices.
Create a more secure Internet 
of Things
—	 Businesses have a better understanding of best practice security controls 
for the Internet of Things. 
Grow a skilled workforce
—	 Survey data indicates increasing availability of job ready cyber 
security workers.
—	 Businesses and academia develop innovative programs to meet local 
cyber security skill requirements. 
—	 More primary, secondary and tertiary students are inspired to pursue a 
career in cyber security.
Block threats automatically
—	 More known malicious threats are prevented from reaching Australians.
45
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Initiative
How the Australian Government will measure success
Actions by the community
Access guidance and information on 
cyber security
—	 Reach and behaviour change metrics for awareness campaigns indicate 
that effective guidance has been delivered. 
—	 The Agency Heads Committee on Online Safety Number oversees a 
number of campaigns.
Access help and support when 
needed
—	 Increased availability and quality of support services for victims of cyber 
crime. 
—	 Increased availability of cyber security advice and assistance for all 
Australians, including through the ACSC’s expanded 24/7 helpdesk.
Make informed purchasing decisions
—	 Community awareness of how to purchase secure digital products 
and services.
Report cyber crime
—	 Increased understanding of the impacts of cyber crime on 
the community.
46
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Appendix A: 
Cyber Security Strategy 2020 
Funding Commitments
Measure
Expenditure 
Cyber Enhanced Situational Awareness and Response
—	 Assistance to critical infrastructure providers
—	 Expanded national exercise program
—	 Transformed Joint Cyber Security Centres
—	 Enhanced customer engagement
—	 Extend cyber security helpdesk for small businesses and families
—	 Extend and expand offshore cyber crime disruption
—	 Enhance cyber threat-sharing platform
—	 New strategic mitigations and disruptions
—	 Expanded data science capabilities
—	 New national situational awareness capability
—	 Emerging technology research labs
—	 Australian Signals Directorate personnel
—	 Intelligence capabilities and program administration
$1,350.0 million 
$66.5 million
$10.0 million
$67.9 million
$58.3 million
$12.3 million
$31.6 million
$35.3 million
$12.5 million
$118.0 million
$62.3 million
$20.2 million
$469.7 million
$385.4 million
Strengthening Australia’s counter cybercrime capability
—	 Bolster law enforcement capabilities
—	 Establish a countering foreign cyber criminals capability within the Australian Cyber Security Centre
$164.9 million
$124.9 million
$40.0 million
Grow Australia’s skills 
—	 Skills partnership innovation fund
—	 Australian Cyber Security Centre education and training programs
—	 Data collection
—	 Cyber skills for students and teachers
—	 Grow the Defence cyber workforce
$90.2 million
$26.5 million
$6.3 million
$2.5 million
$14.9 million
$40.0 million
Support to small and medium enterprises and vulnerable Australians
—	 Expansion of Australian Cyber Security Centre’s support to small and medium enterprises
—	 Connect and Protect Program to assist SMEs with advice and assistance from trusted sources
—	 Enhancing industry outreach and national capability collaboration
—	 Cyber security awareness for Australian families households and small businesses
—	 Boost eSafety’s investigations and support teams 
—	 Support to victims of cyber crime
$63.4 million
$26.0 million
$8.3 million
$8.2 million
$4.9 million
$10.0 million
$6.1 million
Enhance the cyber security of universities
$1.6 million
Total
$1,670.0 million
Totals may vary due to rounding
47
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020

Where can I go for more cyber security information?
If there is a threat to life or risk of harm, please call 000. 
For non-emergencies, cyber.gov.au is the Australian Government’s one stop shop for up-to-date cyber 
security advice, cyber security resources and incident reporting. At cyber.gov.au you can report:
—	
cyber abuse – if someone is bullying, harassing or stalking you online.
—	
online image abuse – if someone has shared or is threatening to share intimate images or videos 
of you online.
—	
online shopping fraud or romance fraud – if you have been deceived into sending money or 
goods to someone online.
—	
identity theft – if someone has used your personal or business identity information and accessed 
your online accounts.
—	
email compromise – if you received an email containing fraudulent information that deceived you 
to send money.
—	
internet fraud – if you have clicked on a phishing link or given someone remote access to a 
computer or device, and money may been taken from your accounts.
—	
ransomware or malware – if your system or devices have been compromised and someone may 
be demanding money.
After you have made a report, the ACSC will make sure your report reaches all the relevant 
government agencies and the police. 
48
Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020



