6 a», DIGITAL GO

==" AGENCY BGD e-GOV CIRT

BANGLADESH

$
EXA BESIESY

DS vna

WE ARE

OF BANGLADESH



CONTENTS TABLE

01 SUMMARY STRATEGY OF EACH PILLARS OF DIGITAL BANGLADESH 2

02 PILLAR -— 1: DIGITAL GOVERNMENT 10

03 PILLAR — 2: HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 14

04 PILLAR — 3: IT INDUSTRY PROMOTIONS 17

05 PILLAR — 4: CONNECTING CITIZENS



Digital
Government

BANGLADESH

3
To

, Industry
“Promotions




STRATEGY + 01

01 To strengthen governance and ecosystem in cyber security

To enhance collaboration and building trust among government
02 agencies, Cll agencies, businesses and partners through information
sharing and effective Public-Private Partnership

To establish and implement National Communication Mechanism for
effective coordination, information sharing and media management



STRATEGY $ 02

Improving
Organization
Management and
Business Operation

(Government, Cll
and Business)

04 To adapt cyber security in business operation

To enhance holistic cyber security controls in supply chain 0 ]

environment

To comply with International Standard (Information Security
06 Management Systems, Business Continuity Management

Systems or equivalent) and Best Practices

To promote the use of certifñed ICT security products 1)

0 To implement Secure Software Development Life Cycle (S-SDLC)
for critical Information System Development

04



DIGITAL GOVERNMENT STRATEGY $ 02

Improving Organization Management and Business Operation
(Government, Cll and Business)

0 0 To establish Data Leakage Protection Mechanism

Adoption and Certification ofICT system such as 150/BDS, 1 O
PCI-DSS, CMMI, TMMI, Uptime etc.

(VAPT) Implementation Plan and conduct periodic risk

1 1 To develop Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing
assessment and VAPT on all critical ICT services

To measure National Readiness Level through periodical study 12

13 To enhance Industrial Control System (ICS) Protection

Mandatory external IT System Audit and submission of IT
System Audit report to Digital Security Agency (DSA) for all Clls 14
on yearly basis




STRATEGY + 03

Strengthening Cyber Security Incident
Management and Aétive Cyber Defense

To develop capacity in combating terrorist/extremist
use of Internet

To enhance national readiness towards bigger scale
IS

06



STRATEGY $ 04-06

To develop a

comprehensive
plan to build
adequate tools
To develop and technology
National Cyber through an
Security Capacity integrated
and Capability approach

Building Plan

To develop cyber

security subject as
one ofthe syllabi at
he primary,
improve cyber secondary and
security awareness ertiary level
program through
implementation collaboration with
approach through Ministry of
adoption and Education,
implementation of University Grant
the National Cyber Commission (UGC)
Security Awareness
Master Plan




STRATEGY + 07 - 08

To stimulate and encourage cross discipline
research and collaboration

To stimulate the creation of new local cyber
security ventures through the establishment
of cyber security start-up / incubation hub

Promote the use oflocal ICT security products
and services and support the growth and
expansion of the local cyber security industry

To strengthen academic centers of excellence
in universities through collaboration with
academia, educational institutes and industry




STRATEGY + 09 - 10

Enhancing Bangladesh's Cyber Laws to Address Current and Emerging Threats

To study the need to introduce a new laws, ¡.e.
Data Protection Act
Digital Security Act
Act/ Strategy/ Policy for Emerging Technologies (Big Data, Machine
Learning, Artificial Intelligence, Block chain, loT etc.)
Appropriate rules under the acts.
Appropriate guidelines and frameworks for the application of the
acts.

Enhancing the Capacity and Capability of Cybercrime Enforcement




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

Digital Bangladesh vision has brought the services to the doorsteps of citizens through fast digitization and
e-service rollout. Now government intends to consolidate and secure these services in the cyberspace. The
focus is now.on strengthening the four pillars of Digital Bangladesh in cyberspace. In an ideal world, we would
ave a national standard for governance and management that allows for shared accountability and
ross-sectional integration to maximize efforts in responding to concerns, threats, and breaches.

o >

An active cyber defense posture, ranging from Advanced Persistent
Threat to cybercrime and content-related challenges, ¡is required
increase national resilience against cyber threats. To reduce cyber risk
this strategy will promote both defensive and offensive capabilitie
with an emphasis on the capacity to detect, analyze, and respond to a
cyber threat inside our ICT ecosystem.

DD

Digital Security Agency will enforce a sustainable governance a
management structure to support the duties assigned to ¡t throug
Digital Security Act 2018. The governance and communication will b
dynamic, adaptable, and ready to meet the challenges to attain better
resilience. lt should provide effective framework for action pla
promoting strong partnerships among stakeholders such as Critical
Informatio frastructures  (Clls), law enforcement agencies,
organizations, general public etc. These collaborations will provide
platforms for exchanging information, developing strategies, and
pooling ofthe resources.

=

This will help to realize secured Digital Bangladesh through supporting
three major objectives:

1 Improving the secured governance and ecosystem for Digita
Bangladesh;

E Improving the governments, Cll's, and  enterprises'
organizational management and business operations;

E Increasing the effectiveness of cyber security incident response
and cyber defense;




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

The Pillar-l (Digital Governance) aims at enhancing the capacity to defend organizational networks, data, and
systems from cyber-attacks and mitigation of threats. Organizations will invest to improve capacity to predict,
identify, investigate and mitigate threats. The organization will adopt ITIL (Information Technology
Infrastructure Library)/150/8DS standards clearly outlining the duties and responsibilities of all stakeholders
within the ecosystem in order to improve the national cyber security governance framework. Threat
information sharing platforms will coordinate with Digital Security Agency (DSA) to identify and close gapsin
responsibility and coordination across agencies.

DSA will serve as the focal point for the execution of proactive measures to secure the government and Clls
networks, systems, and data, as well as to strengthen inter-agency collaboration in the fight against
cybercrime. However, individual Clls and institutions will be solely responsible for ensuring security of their
own ICT infrastructures and applications. Outsourcing or delegating security obligations to a third party will
not relieve or indemnify organizations of their security obligations.

All Security Operation Centers (50€s) in Bangladesh will report to the N-CERT for coordination among 50Cs,

Digital Bangladesh has contributed to the rise of e-government initiatives, e-commerce transactions, and
digital economy. This had made inroads in the usage of Artificial Intelligence and machine learning in modern
systems, the increasing application of loT in devices and peripherals, 5G communication systems and the
extensive use of complex Industrial Control Systems. All of which inadvertently would open up even more
avenue for potentials risks and threats to security, safety and privacy. Specially, the production at industries
will be dependent on 5G communications for production controls. These have the potential to stop critical
operations through back doors available on Such platforms. Appropriate policies and guidelines for usage of5G
in production and control systems will be formulated for security and privacy.

== 3

Government-led Technical Working Group will be established to spearhead an in depth study on laws, rules
and regulations as well as standards and best practices in cyber security that have to be adhered to for adaption
of 56 and other 4IR technologies in the country. A training platform to assist participating organizations in
complying with cyber security standards will be established. Data Protection Act and Rules will be enacted to
protect data leakage protection mechanism through proper policies, procedures and guidelines related to data
protection, public key infrastructure (PKI) and electronic information management.




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) will be established and registered by DSA in all Clls to improve
and strengthen the National Cyber Security Incident Response Team (€SIRT), Sector CSIRT and Organization
CSIRT. The CSIRTs will be provided with the necessary capabilities and capacity to handle, mitigate and recover
from cyber crisis and incidents. Cyber incident reporting to DSA is mandatory for all organizations and Clls as
per the Digital Security Act, 2018. IT System Audit, Vulnerability Assessment must be conducted on yearly
basis and reported to DSA.

Combating terrorists and violent extremists' use of the Internet will continue to be a
priority area, with the main objectives of: raising awareness among the public; and
preventing radicalization and terrorist recruitment and fund raising activities
. through digital platforms such as social media and web portals. An integrated
information-sharing platform shall be developed to facilitate flow of
information between relevant agencies.

The implementation of the Bangladesh Cyber Security Strategy will be
supervised through an annual evaluation process, after which a Bangladesh
Ger Security Strategy landscape report will be prepared and presented to the
stakeholders for milestone reviews and further deliberations.

Improving Organization Management
and Business Operation (Government,
Cll and Business)

Enhancing National Cyber
Security Governance and
Ecosystem

=m To strengthen governance and
ecosystem in cyber security

= To enhance collaboration and building
rust among government agencies, Cll
agencies, businesses and partners
hrough information sharing and
effective Public-Private Partnership
o establish and implement National
Communication Mechanism for
effective coordination, — information
Sharing and media management

o adapt cyber security in business operatio!
= To enhance holistic cyber security controls in
supply chain environmel
= To comply with Intemational Standa
Information Security Management Systems,
Business Continuity Management Systems or
equivalent) and Best Practices
= To promote the use of certified ICT securi
products
= To implement Secure Software Development

Life (yde (S-SDLO for critical Information

System Development
= To establish Data leakage Protection
lechanism

MB STRATEGIES



Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

Improving Organization Management
and Business Operation (Government,
Cll and Business)

Strengthening Cyber Security
Incident Management and
Active Cyber Defence

Adoption and Certification oICT system such
as 150/8DS, PCI-DSS, CMMI, TMMI, Uptime
etc

= To develop Vulnerability Assessment and

Penetration Testing (VAPT) Implementation

Plan and conduct periodicrisk assessmentany

VAPT on all critical IC services

= Tomeasure National Readiness Level through

periodical study
= To enhance Industrial Control System (1CS)

Protection

= Mandatory extermal IT System Audit and
submission of IT System Auditreportto Digital
Security Agency (DSA) for all Clls on yearly
Dasis.

= To strengthen capacity and capability in
Incident Managementthrough establisament
ofNational Security Operation Center (N-SOC)
To develop capacity in combating terrorist/ex-
tremistuse of Internet
= To enhance national readiness towards bigger
scale and targeted cyber attad

= To develop National Cyber Security
Capacity and Capability Building Plan
= To develop a comprehensive plan to
uild adequate tools and technology
hrough an integrated approach
= To improve cyber security awareness
rogram implementation approach
hrough adoption and implementation
of the National Cyber Security
Awareness Master Pla
= To develop cyber security subject as one
of the syllabi at the primary, secondary
and tertiary level through collaboration
with Ministry of Education, University
Grant Commission (UGC).

a

D

STRATEGIES

=




Pillars H 2

To meet the
challenges of the
rapidly changing
nature of cyber

reats, the government

ill develop and imple-
ent a comprehensive
ational Cyber Security Capacity and Capability Plan that will determine the areas of expertise and skill sets
at will need to be continuously improved and enhanced at national, sectoral and organizational levels.

Do

33s

Correspondingly, this Pillar aims to enhance capacity and capability building, awareness and education
rough three strategic initiative, specifically by:

Enhancing national cyber security capacity and capability

Enhancing cyber security awareness

Nourishing cyber security knowledge through educa

on

The Plan will be implemented by building coherent cross sector collaboration in strategic information sharing
and security awareness initiatives, deepening the understanding of advanced threats, developing a culture
that understands security risks in the context of business resiliency and expanding the capability to develop a
safer and more resilient technology, as well as the ability to respond to advanced threats.

Bangladesh has been developing and implementing cyber security capacity and capability through various
ministries, agencies and Cll organizations. Enhancements of national cyber security capacity and capability
will be focused on increasing the number of local skilled professionals through training and certification
programs to meet the demands for skilled workforce in both the public and private sectors. Specialist skill
development, on the other hand, requires pursuing good quality and established security professional
certifications primarily in specific areas of cyber security domain, that are lacking in the country.

o




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

eanwhile, awareness and education would require, among other things, the identification of necessary
arget audiences and content development approaches that can enable resource sharing and collaboration.
he government, through its various agencies, will take up the crucial role of empowering all levels of society
o understand cyber security-related risks and challenges, as well as the necessary defensive measures needed
or safer Internet use.

Do

he government will also provide additional funding and scholarships in order to encourage knowledge
acquisition and enrichment among existing cyber security professionals. This will help develop a new
generation of cyber security professionals, with necessary education and skills.

Dm

Currently, Bangladesh Government has started its efforts to increase the number of local cyber security
professionals through the implementation of Global Accredited Cybersecurity Education (ACE) Scheme. Itis a
holistic professional certification scheme established indigenously to certify and recognize cyber security
personnel in tandem with ISO/IEC 17024 on people certifications, ISO/IEC 9000 on processes and
150/1£C27001 on security management.

To enhance Bangladesh's approach on cyber security awareness, the government will develop and implement
the National Cyber Security Awareness Master Plan. Under the Plan, the National Cyber Security Awareness
Governance structure will be established, which aims to develop an integrated and concerted cyber security
awareness program. The primary aim of the integrated program is to reduce the number of cyber incidents by
running cyber security awareness programs and call for actions that are more organized, coordinated and able
to reach a wider target audience among Bangladesh.

o

The P atives on public-private driven collaboration and coordination, and t
mobilization of resources to enable a wider outreach of programs to kids, youth, adults/parents a

an will outline integrated in e
d
organizations. Initiatives by various agencies will also be implemented in an integrated and coordinated
e
e

manner to ensure a wider coverage and bigger impact. This will be crucial in educating citizens on t
necessary knowledge to detect and avoid abuse, fraud and crime online, as well as to nurture accountab
behavior, thereby creating well-informed and responsible cyber citizens.

At the same time, we will also be working on establishing a creative content development program
mechanism that brings together all the stakeholders, from both the public and private sectors, to share their
experience and best practices on creating awareness. Itis hoped that a unified national brand of cyber security
awareness program can then be developed, one which streamlines the content of various awareness programs
based on the accepted security baseline framework. A corresponding measurement mechanism will also be
appropriately devised to evaluate the effectiveness ofthe said programs and to identify ways to improve them
from time to time.




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

(yber security will also become part of the syllabi at the primary, secondary and tertiary level ofeducation.
Given the increasing threats from cyberspace and the all-embracing nature of CT and the Internet, especially
among the younger generation of Bangladeshi, we believe that it is never too early to introduce and foster
cyber security awareness. Our youth needs to be equipped with the necessary cyber security knowledge and
vols to ensure safety and security.

In academia, there is a need to embed cyber security across taught courses under ICT and Computer Engineer-
ing programs. As an example, cyber security requirements need to betaught in Software Programming (secure
coding), Software and System Development Cycle (Secure SDLC), Database, Operating Systems, Network, IT
Administration and Management, as well as cross platform application development. This effort is in addition
o the present dedicated cyber security related courses being taught in colleges and universities.

he same effort of introducing cyber security related issues across non-ICT or non-Engineering disciplines
covering cyber law in Law, FinTech in Finance, security risk management of network ready medical devices in
Health, among others, is necessary to enable graduates to stay relevant and to be able to grasp the impact of
new technological developments. Within the Public Service Department, there is a need to establish cyber
security as a vertical (grade) in the government sector to enable specialization in the various domains under
information security and to enable retention of these trained personnel within their expertise by providing
sufficient opportunities for career growth.

Enhancing Cyber
Security Awareness

Enhancing National m To improve cyber security

Nourishing Cyber

(yber Security 2 awareness program !
Capacity and : implementation — approach |: Security Knowledge
Capability Building : through the implementation — f: Through Education
: of the National Cyber Security : —
Awareness Master Plan

m To develop National Cyber
Security Capacity and Capability
Building Plan
m To develop a comprehensive
plan to build adequate tools and
technology through an
integrated approach

m To develop cyber security
subject as one of the syllabi at
the primary, secondary and
tertiary evel through
collaboration with Ministry of
Education and University Grant
Commission (UGC).

16



Pillars H 3

A

La o ss

o stimula
ew loca

universities

ventures through the estab
ishent of cyber — securi
start-up / ideation hub
o promote the use of local
CT security products a
services and support t
growth and expansion oft
ocal cyber security industry
To strengthen  academi
centres of excellence

collaboration with aca
educational
industry

e the creation of

cyber securi

throug

in

demia,

y

C

h

institutes a

d



Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

Digital connectivity has both empowered and endangered
businesses and individuals. lt opens new social and commercial
opportunities, yet also exposes citizens to criminal syndicates across the world.
By commandeering computing devices, these malicious actors can steal data; extort
money, and attack networks, causing harm to others. (yberspace needs to be kept safe and
trustworthy for businesses and individuals to benefit from it. Keeping cyberspace safe requires
a spectrum of actions from the international to individual levels. Countries have to cooperate to take
down criminals operating across borders, while businesses and individuals can take preventive measures
to keep their systems and devices safe. Cybersecurity is the collective responsibility of everyone - the
Government, businesses, individuals and the community.

=

Working together, the administrative branches and the business community will chart the legislation, including any
needs to review the provisions relevant to the cyber domain and cyber security. The results ofthis action will comprise
the proposals for legislative review which will advance the achievement of the goals ofthe (ybersecurity Strategy.

The charting will take into account the rapidly changing phenomena in the cyber domain. One of the purposes is to
provide the competent authorities and other actors with the sufficient means and powers through legislation to
implement cyber defenses for the functions vital to society and, especially, the security of the state. Any possible
legislative hurdles, restrictions and obligations related to data protection, as well as those arising from international
obligations, that impede the obtainability, disclosure and exchange of information useful for effective cyber defense
purposes, will be taken under review. When it comes to the assessment of information-gathering and other data
processing one should also estimate whether the competent authorities should have improved possibilities for
gathering information, data processing, or being informed of cyber threats and their sources, while simultaneously
paying attention to ensuring the basic rights of privacy and confidentiality in electronic communications.




Pillars H 4

To enhance and review the To strengthen  cybercrime
current legal frameworks to enforcement capacity and
address cybercrime capability in managing cyber-
To study the need to introduce a crime, advanced threats and
new laws, ¡.e organized syndicates
Data Protection Act raining of Judiciary for
Digital Security Act prosecution under laws relat-
Act/ Strategy/ Policy for ed to cyber crime.
Emerging Technologies (Big training of law enforcement
Data, Machine — Learning, personnel.
Artificial Intelligence, Block nvestment in startups to
chain, loT etc) pro note local cyber security
companies.
Appropriate rules under the reset | he education
acts.
Appropriate guidelines and system for producing
Bachelors, Masters
frameworks for the and PhD in. (ber
application for the acts. Security — from Public

Universities.
Introduction of local cyber
security index to award best
achievers,
Establishrment of Cyber Gym
in all universities offering
Computer Science — (CS),
Computer Science €
Engineering (CSE) and Cyber
Security.

=




Pillars H 4

e notion of digital society reflects the results ofthe modern society in adopting and integrating information and
communication technologies at home, work, education and recreation. Digital innovations are reshaping our society,
economy and industries with a scale and speed like never before. Mobile and cloud technologies, Big Data and the
Internet of Things offer unimaginable opportunities, driving growth, improvement of citizens lives and efficiency to
many areas including health services, transportation, energy, agriculture, manufacturing, retail and public
administration.

=>

=>

All the aforementioned digital innovations need to be implemented with trust and security. In the digital world,
cybersecurity is a prerequisite for the safety of individuals, society and the economy. Innovation will be the key for
cybersecurity in order for Bangladesh to be at the forefront of global competition. Our policies must prioritize
cybersecurity and ensure security-by-design across three pillars: people, process and technology. Policies must
protect the citizens' right to safety, security and privacy; support businesses in innovation; and enable
enforcement to use digital resources to protect public security online and offline in ways which do not undermine
public trust in technology. Compliance with modern and harmonized personal data protection rules; with
well- established standards of security-by-design in all digital technologies, networks and services; and clear privacy
rules that balance citizens' rights and businesses' needs, are vital for building trust and security. The regulatory
framework should be guided by the concept of «as little as possible and as much as necessary», fit for the digital age,
and open and technologically neutral enough to accommodate future development.

7]

=




Pillars of Digital Bangladesh

Strategic Objectives

E To build security and trust in an open and free digital society.

ma lo strengthen the security of digital society in order to give individuals, businesses, and public bodies more
confidence in the use of 1CT.

El To ensure legal protection in the digital domain, prevent social disruption, and lead to appropriate action if
hings go wrong.

To achieve these strategic objectives, the following lines of action have been drawn up:

ma Facilitate Digital identity for every citizen so that everyone can use simple and secure digital credentials.

ma dentify and prevent vulnerabilities and handle incidents. This requires awareness of information and
cybersecurity and of how to protect information systems.

mm Ensure privacy in the digital society. The use of personal data is often crucial to streamline and develop both
public and the private services. The right to privacy is essential to maintain confidence, security and trust in the
digital environment.

HE Preserve democracy in digital environments. Opportunities to spread threats, hatred, extremist propaganda
and deliberate dissemination of false information increase. Freedom of expression must be given very wide
imits. However, strong action is required against criminal acts in digital environments.

Mm Foster a secure and mobile labour market. Digitalization fundamentally changes the labour market, including
he nature ofthe work and working environment. Close dialogue between the government and social partners
o ensure continuous adaptation to social development is essential.

mM Promote well functioning digital markets and secure consumers. Digital markets must always be a safe and
egal place for consumers and businesses. Regulatory and supervisory authorities should maintain effective
consumer protection and competition on equal terms.

A III A






