Austrian Strategy for
Cybersecurity 2021
OSCS 2021

Vienna, 2021

Foreword

Dear readers,

Digital technology has now established itself in every
area of our lives. We shop online, we communicate using
smartphones, and we carry out our banking transactions
over the Internet. Systems for distributing goods are run
via the cloud, our water and electricity networks are
controlled electronically, and our hospitals have been

reliant on computers for a long time now.

All these developments come with enormous potential,
but they entail risks, and we need to take these risks
seriously. With this in mind, cybersecurity is becoming
increasingly important in our efforts to keep cyberspace

safe and secure.

Cyberattacks are neither limited to individual sectors
of the economy nor do they stop at national borders.
To ensure society is as resilient as possible in the face
of cyber threats, we need to work together even more
closely at both the domestic and the international levels,
intensifying existing dialogues and exchanging even
more data. It is only by working together that we will be
able to react to the constant change of the digital realm
and adapt to the challenges it poses, to exploit digital

technology's potential to boost our research institutions

and economic development, and to deploy the limited
numbers of cybersecurity staff available as effectively

as possible in the long run.

The Austrian Strategy for Cybersecurity 2021 - referred to
as “the Strategy” or by its German acronym “OSCS 2021”,
is designed to guide our efforts to meet cybersecurity
challenges as effectively as possible. It serves to
implement a major pillar of the current government’s
policy in this area also laying the groundwork for a
systemic approach to cooperation between government

agencies, research institutions and businesses.

What is more, the OSCS 2021 also forms part of the
EU’s “European Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital
Decade”. In this way, Austria does not only make a
significant contribution to its’s cybersecurity, but it also
works towards a global, open and safe cyberspace. The
Austrian Strategy for Cybersecurity 2021 will create the
conditions needed to exploit the opportunities of the
digital world as effectively as possible over the coming
years and decades and, above all, ensure that digital

services are secure and safe for us all to use.

Karl Nehammer

Federal Chancellor



9 The vision behind OSCS 2021 is to create a
secure cyberspace over the long-term, and to
make Austria and the European Union more
resilient against cyber threats by adopting a
national approach to cybersecurity.



We live in the age of digitalisation, and our society is more connected than it has ever
been before. The advances of digital technology have transformed our private and work-
ing lives, as well as the way we do business. Citizens are every bit as reliant on digital
services as companies and government bodies, which depend on digital networks and
infrastructure to perform their core tasks. However, the more connected we are and the
more dependent we are on digital services, the more vulnerable our society becomes.
Cyberattacks and security incidents can have huge repercussions for our society and
economy, for example by impairing services and disrupting the work of businesses and

government agencies.

Therefore, it is extremely important to make Austria more resilient against cyber threats
and to ensure that the digital world in its entirety is as safe as possible, both from an
economic and a security point of view. With this in mind, cybersecurity is a top priority
for Austria, and a major challenge for all sectors, government, businesses, scientific

institutions and society alike.

Cybersecurity is not merely a national task, and Austria is a part of the European Union.
By combating current and future cyber threats, the EU is making an effort to actively
protect society and to secure our prosperity and values as well as the fundamental rights
and freedoms in Europe. In so doing, the EU is also working hard to improve our defensive
capabilities, to increase our strategic autonomy, technological capacity and specialist
skills, and to promote a robust internal market. From the cybersecurity perspective,
protecting the digital single market, and the single market more generally, is crucial for
the economic performance of both Austria and the EU, which is why cybersecurity is a

top priority both in Austria and the EU.

A global, open, stable and secure cyberspace in which the principles of international
law — particularly those relating to human rights and humanitarian law — are upheld will
be a key pillar of future economic development for both Austria and the EU. When it

comes to the cyberspace, Austria is taking an active stance in bilateral and multilateral

"1



12

discussions, advocating respect for international law, strengthening voluntary standards,
rules and principles that define responsible behaviour by state actors in cyberspace,

and encouraging confidence-building measures on cyber issues.

The Austrian Strategy for Cybersecurity 2021 is made up of two parts. The first part sets
out a long-term, overarching structure in which strategic considerations are stated. It
includes a description of the situation, a summary of challenges and opportunities, the
framework for implementing the Strategy, and how the Strategy will be monitored. The
second part sets out the specific measures to be implemented under the Strategy in
order to achieve the objectives. The implementation of the Strategy will be monitored

using an online platform.

This structure makes it possible to react flexibly to the ever-changing threat pictures, and
to respond quickly to challenges as they arise. Changes in the cybersecurity landscape
may be triggered by political, technological, societal and economic developments within

Austria as well as at the EU and the international levels.



European, international and Austrian frameworks

The OSCS 2021 draws on the principles set out in the Austrian Security Strategy, and
represents a further development of the 2013 edition of the Austrian Strategy for
Cybersecurity, which set out the underlying structures and processes required in order
to formulate a comprehensive and coherent cybersecurity policy. The Austrian Strategy
for Cybersecurity 2021 builds on its predecessor by incorporating the Austrian govern-
ment’s policy programme for 2020 to 2024 and the framework to be adopted at both

the European and the international levels, which will be discussed below.

With the entry into force of the Directive on Security of Network and Information
Systems’ (NIS Directive), comprehensive cybersecurity legislation was adopted at the EU
level for the first time. The Directive's definitions of harmonised security standards and
reporting procedures for all enterprises considered essential for the continued operation
of the EU’s single market (and, by extension, of member states’ economies) make up
the core of this legislation. Austria has incorporated the NIS Directive into national law
by means of the Netz- und Informationssystemsicherheitsgesetz, or the Network and
Information Systems Security Act (known by its German acronym, NISG). The Network
and Information Systems Security Act not only sets out standardised security require-
ments for all enterprises pertaining to critical infrastructure, but also provides the first

ever legal basis for drafting a cybersecurity strategy.

The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems, however, was only the

beginning of the EU’s intensive efforts to improve cybersecurity.

1 Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning
measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the
Union (NIS Directive).

15



16

The EU regularly adjusts its strategic framework with a view to building a digital Europe,
in which security, trust, competitiveness, awareness of Europe’s strengths, respect for
the EU’s shared values, and an open attitude towards the rest of the world can all be
bolstered up alongside the development of an open, secure Internet. The EU Cyber-
security Act of 2019 upgraded ENISA to an EU cybersecurity agency in its own right,
created the legal framework for IT security certification programmes in the EU, and
since then has been an integral part of the European cybersecurity framework.” The last
major update to the policy framework around cybersecurity was in 2020, when the EU
presented a new package of cybersecurity measures. This package includes an updated
“EU Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital Decade”, a revised Directive concerning
measures for a high common level of security across the Union (“NIS 2.0”), and a new
Directive on the resilience of critical infrastructure.’ The EU is also setting up a European
Cybersecurity Industrial, Technology and Research Competence Centre, as well as a
network of national coordination centres intended to pool cybersecurity investments
in research, technology and industrial development, as well as to direct that investment
in a targeted manner and ensure more effective coordination. In addition, there are also
plans to set up an EU “cybersecurity competence community”, which will bring together
key cybersecurity interest groups with a view to improving and deepening specialist

cybersecurity expertise across the EU.

2. Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on
ENISA (the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity) and on the certification of cybersecurity
of information and communications technology, and on repealing Regulation (EU) No. 526/2013
(Cybersecurity Act)

3. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2391 (Retrieved on 13 December
2021)



If necessary, the EU can draw upon the full range of applicable measures under the
Common Foreign and Security Policy in order to prevent and combat malicious cyber
activity. This range of measures, known as the “Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox”, is designed
to prevent conflict, contain cyber threats, and promote stable international relations.
The Toolbox includes exchanges with third countries on cyber issues, as well as coordi-
nated EU diplomatic response options to malicious cyberattacks, up to, and including,

sanctions against the perpetrators.

Cooperation between EU member states is critical to the success of these measures.
A number of working groups and networks have been set up at the EU level in order to
draw up relevant concepts and define major topic areas related to cybersecurity. Austria

plays an active role in these groupings.

Negotiations on cybersecurity will continue at the United Nations (UN) over the next
few years on a broad basis. As part of these negotiations, Austria is working hard to
ensure closer cooperation with third countries. By ensuring that international law is
adhered and voluntary standards for good governance are implemented and strength-
ened, conflicts in cyberspace can be prevented. As Vienna is home to one of the UN’s
headquarters, Austria will host important negotiations on a UN Convention on Cybercrime
over the next years. The upcoming convention is intended to strengthen international
cooperation with a view to combating cybercrime more effectively. The Vienna-based
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) also plays an important

role in preventing cyber conflicts.

17



18

Drafting the OSCS 2021

Cybersecurity is a highly-specialised and extremely dynamic field. To reflect this, experts
from the areas of business, education and training, and research and development worked
together with the Austrian Federal Government's specialists to draw up the OSCS 2021
as a part of a multi-stage process. This nuanced approach presents cybersecurity as a

challenge and task that must be faced at every level of society.

Structures and processes within sovereign administration

Cybersecurity is a national task that touches upon numerous disciplines, and this is why
effective coordination mechanisms and cooperation between state agencies is called
for. Combining forces from all ministries involved in cybersecurity will make the state’s

efforts to combat cyber threats and incidents significantly more effective.

The OSCS 2021 builds on the national structures established as a part of the OSCS
2013, which are derived from the legal framework and responsibilities, as well as estab-
lished committees, platforms and coordination mechanisms spanning across sectors

and ministries.

Strategic coordination in the area of cybersecurity is carried out centrally by the Federal
Chancellery and includes all national as well as the European and the international
coordination in the cyber field. The Federal Ministry for European and International
Affairs handles European and international cybersecurity issues as a part of its overall
responsibility for foreign and security policy. Within Austria, the Federal Ministry of the
Interior is responsible for maintaining public order and security, including the security
of cyberspace and combating cybercrime. Under the Austrian Network and Information
Systems Security Act, the Federal Ministry of the Interior is also responsible for the

practical implementation of cybersecurity measures at the operational level. Austria’s



20

military national defence in cyberspace falls under the Federal Ministry of Defence. The
various ministries in charge of cybersecurity issues cooperate closely at the strategic
and the operational levels. The responsibilities of other ministries with regard to cyber-
security issues are set out in the Bundesministeriengesetz or Federal Ministries Act.
Cooperation with Austria’s provinces and municipalities takes place according to the
principle of self-government. Local authorities act within their own individual remits,

while remaining in close and active dialogue with federal agencies.

As far as the security of network and information systems is concerned, two organisa-
tions have been set up within Austria to facilitate coordination at the operational level
by providing an updated picture of the situation at all times and helping to coordinate
the response of cybersecurity specialists to cyber incidents. These two organisations
operate under the auspices of the Federal Ministry of the Interior, and are known as the
Operative Coordination Structure, and the Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination
Structure. In the event of a crisis, the Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination Structure
serves as the direct hub for communications with the Cyber Crisis Management, which
works at the national level, supported by the Operative Coordination Structure. The
Cyber Crisis Management provides a platform for coordinating the response to a cyber
incident across ministries and agencies. The Federal Ministry of the Interior is in charge
of operational control and coordination of the Cyber Crisis Management. Should in the
event of a cyber crisis a military involvement in cyberspace (e.g. in defence against
a cyberattack with the potential to compromise Austria’s sovereignty) be called for,
operational command is transferred from the Federal Ministry of the Interior to the

Federal Ministry of Defence.

The Cyber Security Steering Group and the Cyber Security Platform operate additionally
at the strategic level. The Cyber Security Steering Group is responsible for implementing
the Austrian Strategy for Cybersecurity. It provides the main platform for cooperation
and exchange of information between businesses, the scientific community, and public

administration.



28

Digitalisation plays an important role in global networks, which makes it an enabler for
both economic and social development, but this is not without its risks. These risks have
the potential to develop into genuine threats, capable of jeopardising and destabilising

Austria and its society. They can be divided into the following categories:

1. Threats resulting from the abuse of information technology (IT)
Both state and non-state actors are using cyberspace as an arena in which to carry
out ideological, political and criminal attacks. These attacks range from cybercrime
and cyber espionage (either independently or as a part of a hybrid threat scenario)

through to cyber warfare.

Also the deliberate use of an IT-based information platform in order to manipulate,
influence and destabilise democratic processes or public opinion also falls into this

category.

2. Threats resulting from the incorrect use of IT
While deliberate and malicious misuse of IT is a significant danger, inadvertently
using the system the wrong way can pose challenges, too. Inadvertent misuse of IT
is usually the result of lack of expertise on the part of the user. If the user fails to
exercise due care and attention when using information technology, a variety of risks
may be triggered. These risks, however, can be met with security technology only to
a limited extent. Insufficient preparation for attacks and negligent use of IT systems
can make companies and organisations particularly easy targets. This applies to all
value creation and production processes, including any and all involved suppliers;

particularly the latter should be taken into account in risk management procedures.



3. Threats resulting from dependence on IT systems

Insecure IT products and services can pose risks, but the same is also true for our
increasing dependence on IT systems and their availability. Therefore, the disruption
of previously secure technology can lead to significant financial losses and a wide
range of other dangers. The use of cloud technologies is particularly risky in this
regard. Given our increasing reliance on these systems, the shortage of qualified
cybersecurity staff is another challenge with which companies and organisations

are faced.

As the digitalisation process unfolds, our dependence on IT systems will continue to
increase, which in view of the states’ digital geopolitics, the complexity of internet
governance regulations, the shortage of resources and our increased reliance on

infrastructure in aerospace will cause new challenges to arise.

Threats resulting from new technologies

As digitalisation spreads into areas and procedures where IT was not used in the
past, new security challenges come up. What is more, the replacement of older IT
applications with new technologies may also cause such challenges. Indeed, the devel-
opment of artificial intelligence (Al), the Internet of Things (loT), and other emerging
and disruptive technologies, such as quantum technology, is expected to usher in a
range of new security risks. Changes in the functionality of new IT systems can also
trigger new risks, particularly where IT applications that were previously used in a
supporting role become major or controlling elements of digital systems. In addition

to these security-related issues, also technical and ethical concerns arise.

The OSCS 2021 marks a major contribution to confronting these new challenges.

29



Our commitment to national cybersecurity provision;
Austria’s contribution to cybersecurity in the EU

Austria is committed to a national approach to cybersecurity provision, and to creating
a secure cyberspace as a part of its comprehensive national defence and comprehensive
security provision. The national approach to cybersecurity is designed to guarantee

Austria’s sovereignty and ability to act on the international stage.

This approach is implemented by means of a comprehensive cybersecurity policy, which
forms an integral part of Austria’s national defence and goes well beyond foreign, defence
and security policy-related issues. Specifically, Austria’s national approach to cyber-
security also encompasses economic, infrastructure and financial policy considerations,

as well as the policies on education, training, science and research.

Ensuring Austria is adequately prepared to meet any cybersecurity threat requires a
national approach in which the state, businesses, the scientific community and society
as a whole contribute. Hence, it can be said that the present Strategy is relevant to all

of Austria.

Moreover, Austria both contributes to, and benefits from, the EU’s cybersecurity archi-
tecture. Due to the transnational character of cyberspace and mutual dependencies,
security and resilience in cyberspace can only be guaranteed in the long term with a
Europe-wide approach. Any measures that bolster the EU’s security in cyberspace simul-
taneously strengthens Austria’s cybersecurity as well. This is why Austria is committed

to supporting and implementing the European Union's Cyber Security Strategy.

35



36

Vision and objectives

Our commitment to national cybersecurity provision underpins the vision set out in

this section:

The vision behind OSCS 2021 is to create a secure cyberspace over the long-
term, and to make Austria and the European Union more resilient against

cyber threats by adopting a national approach to cybersecurity.

In order to turn this vision into reality, OSCS 2021 aims to achieve the following objectives:

1. Ensure that Austria has access to sufficient financial and human resources in order
to prevent, recognise and defend itself against cyber threats and cyber incidents,

and to prosecute the perpetrators of cyberattacks.

2. Ensure that Austria is capable of protecting and defending its critical information

systems and infrastructure in the event of a crisis.

3. Ensure that cybersecurity is perceived as the joint responsibility of the state,
businesses, and society as a whole in Austria, that clearly defined responsibilities
and remits are set out, and that all stakeholders play an active role within their

respective areas of responsibility.

4. Ensure that there is a national picture of the cybersecurity situation, and that
cybersecurity skills are strengthened and promoted in all strata of society, the

economy and in daily life, and that the awareness of cybersecurity is raised.



10.

11.

12.

Implementing the measures set out in the above list will help to achieve these objectives.

Ensure that all Austrians have a secure platform to take part in social and political

life in cyberspace.

Ensure that Austria has the statutory and operational mechanisms in order to
make it a secure and attractive destination for companies in cyberspace, and to

prosecute cyber criminals in an appropriate manner.

Ensure that Austria is actively engaged in cybersecurity issues and working
closely together with all stakeholders at the national, the European and the

international levels.

Ensure cooperation with the EU so that Austria can defend its digital sovereignty

and contribute to the strategic autonomy of the EU as a whole.

Ensure that Austria’s cybersecurity field works in a coordinated and networked

manner.

Ensure that Austria trains sufficient cybersecurity experts with a view to making
the country more resilient, meeting the demands of the labour market, and

combating cybercrime in the long term.

Ensure that Austria plays an active role in applying and strengthening

international standards for cyberspace.

Ensure that Austria continues its national approach to developing the legal
framework for cybersecurity to make cyberspace more secure and fight

cybercrime.

37



Structures

The structures required to implement the OSCS 2021 are currently being developed,
built on the structural requirements set out in the OSCS 2013.

Strategic level

Cyber Security Steering Group

The Cyber Security Steering Group is the central strategic planning body for cyber-
security in Austria. It is responsible for developing and coordinating all the measures
laid down in the OSCS. It also monitors the implementation of the OSCS, updates the

List of Measures, and elaborates an annual report on cybersecurity.

The Cyber Security Steering Group is made up of high-ranking cybersecurity experts
from the ministries represented on Austria’s National Security Council. The National
Security Council also includes the ministries responsible for telecommunications and
digitalisation. Depending on the subject(s) under discussion, the members of the Cyber
Security Steering Group may invite other state bodies (“entities of public administration”)
to take part in so-called “Extended Cyber Security Steering Group” meetings. This
includes especially those ministries that are either directly affected by the measures
of the OSCS 2021 or whose area of responsibility touches upon enterprises and/or

organisations affected by it.

Cyber Crisis Management Coordination Committee

The Austrian Network and Information Systems Security Act provides for the creation
of a coordination committee, called Cyber Crisis Management Coordination Committee,
which is tasked with identifying cyber crises and deciding on the operational measures
to be taken to combat such crises. The Committee is headed by the Director General

for Public Security, and made up of the Chief of Defence Staff, the Secretary General of

43



44

the Austrian Federal Chancellery, and the Secretary General of the Federal Ministry of
European and International Affairs. In the event of a crisis, the Committee is joined by
additional representatives from federal and/or province authorities, providers of critical

services, computer emergency response teams and emergency services as required.*

Operational level

Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination Structure

The Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination Structure was created under the auspices
of the Network and Information Systems Security Act as an inter-ministerial body
charged with coordinating cybersecurity activity at the operational level. It discusses and
updates the national cybersecurity picture and supports the Coordination Committee

in the Cyber Crisis Management.

The Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination Structure is currently being expanded. In
the future it will be equipped with all the required resources to provide recommendations
and assessments on cybersecurity issues for the federal administration on behalf of the

Cyber Security Steering Group.

Operative Coordination Structure

The Operative Coordination Structure is designed to coordinate operational activity in the
field of cybersecurity. It is composed of the members of the Inner Circle of the Operative
Coordination Structure and the computer emergency response teams established under
the Network and Information Systems Security Act. Representatives of the operators
of critical services, providers of digital services and Entities of Public Administration,
including their respective computer emergency response teams, may also be integrated

into the Operative Coordination Structure as required.

4 See Network and Information Systems Security Act Section 25. (1)f



Target audiences

The central target audiences for the OSCS 2021 are society as a whole, businesses, the
education sector, and the research and development community. The individual measures
required to meet the respective objectives are assigned to different target audiences

according to their focus.

Society

Topic area “trust and privacy”

Trust in IT products and services is particularly important to citizens. This trust is to
be built through transparency, data protection, data security and the protection of the
users’ privacy. Secure communications are a basic prerequisite for citizens’ participation
in society via digital channels, as well as for exercising fundamental human rights in

cyberspace.

Digital proof of identity and secure communication channels are of central significance
in the private environment, the business world and to services provided by the state
and public administration. Access to personal and confidential data must be logged ina
traceable manner, and minimised as far as required. High quality electronic identification
is essential so as to ensure that data and privacy are adequately protected, and included
in new concepts from the design stage. After all, data protection and data security as
well as trust in their comprehensive incorporation in electronic identification (e-ID) are
a fundament for their actual use. Electronic identification and the digital passport have
the potential to improve the level of cybersecurity available to citizens, businesses and
public administration across the EU, provided they are developed according to the latest

technological advances.

45



46

Topic area “awareness”

Efforts to raise awareness of cybersecurity across society at large are aimed at capturing
public perception, personal interest, and further raising awareness of the importance
of this issue. This is a fundamental requirement for a self-determined and responsible
behaviour in cyberspace, and will help to make Austrian society more resilient to cyber-

attacks.

Topic area “free opinion-building process”

Individuals cannot form their opinions freely unless the information they receive is genuine
and reliable. As we consume ever more information digitally, the need to secure our
information systems becomes ever more acute. A variety of actors have the capability
to disseminate false or deliberately misleading information via digital communication
channels. These interventions in, and from, the information space are a threat, often
intended to manipulate public debate and the democratic opinion-building process, and
can even extend to attempts to manipulate elections. With this in mind, it is essential

that citizens are able to form their own opinions freely without outside interference.

Topic area “ethics”

In order to be able to assess the effects that the latest technological developments and
the introduction of future technologies have on the fundamental rights and freedoms,
appropriate mechanisms and forums need to be installed. These bodies are to examine

technical and ethical questions associated with such technologies.



48

Business

Topic area “Austria as a business location”

The state and the economy have the shared objective to make Austria an attractive and
safe business location. Improving cybersecurity in enterprises will greatly contribute to
their continued growth and economic success. Reducing our dependence on IT products
and services provided by enterprises from outside Austria and/or the EU will help to

bolster Austria’s and the EU’s sovereignty in the digital realm.

Solutions or products designed to identify and defend against cyberattacks must be

used more widely in order to ensure effective compliance with both Austrian and EU law.

Topic area “small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)”

Cybersecurity is a particularly important element when it comes to strengthening
Austrian SMEs and improving their framework conditions. Cybersecurity is a major factor
in Austria’s digitalisation drive, which is designed to encourage a range of digitalisation
measures among domestic SMEs. In addition, the framework conditions are to be
designed in such a manner that also measures will be taken that strengthen cybersecurity
within small and medium-sized enterprises, for example by enhancing the digital skills
of the employees, by ensuring compliance with basic technical and organisational basic
security requirements, by helping enterprises to select, and cooperate with, reliable

partner enterprises, and by helping them to use trustworthy cloud services.

Topic area “critical national infrastructure”

Critical national infrastructure is worthy of special protection against cyberattacks.
Enhancing the overall level of cybersecurity and improved cooperation will contribute to
making Austria more resilient against cyberattacks. Austria’s cybersecurity programme

is harmonised closely with the national programme for protecting critical infrastructure.



Education, training, research and development

Topic area “education and training”

Expanding Austria’s cybersecurity capabilities and widening the range of respective
training will play an important role in our efforts to defend Austria against cyberattacks.
This will also help to address the current shortage of cybersecurity specialists. A large
number of individual measures and initiatives are already underway across Austria;
these initiatives should be brought together as part of a cohesive overall strategy. Since
digitalisation and technological developments never stop, keeping up with progress
requires life-long learning. This means educating all strata of society in cybersecurity

matters, from children and young people to working age adults and pensioners.

Topic area “research and development”

Research and development are making a major contribution to improving our overall level
of cybersecurity, and thus are also playing an important role in helping to identify the
latest trends and technologies, and develop IT security solutions. Under the OSCS 2021,
a framework will be established to close the gap between application-focused research
projects and the public procurement process. This framework will cover everything
from fundamental research to the introduction of specific products to the market. The
Austrian state is both a client and a launch customer of cybersecurity systems developed
in Austria, and in this dual role helps to enhance an application-focused approach to
research and makes it easier for Austrian enterprises to market their cybersecurity

solutions.

49



50

Public sector

Topic area “resilience”

In order to guarantee Austria's resilience, it is necessary to establish effective and binding
cooperation between federal, provincial and municipal authorities. Efforts to implement
Austria’s Network and Information Systems Security Act and protect Austria’s critical
national infrastructure are particularly important in this respect. The existing mechanisms
for dealing effectively with cyber incidents and crises and the mechanisms for keeping
channels of communication open in the event of an incident are subject to constant
review, and are continuously being improved. Manufacturers and service providers in
Austria and the EU play a particular role in boosting resilience. A major effort is under-

way to develop the legal basis for our national approach to improving cybersecurity.

Topic area “cybercrime and prosecuting offenders”

More and more people using more and more devices and rapidly developing technologies
lead to an ever increasing degree of networking, augmenting the already considerable
potential for cyber criminals to harm our society. This is why it is important to review
and update our detection methods and preventive techniques for attacks as a part of
an overall strategy that is open to the latest developments. By continually updating the
legal basis, including by increasing the range of sentences associated with such offences,
effective prosecution of cybercrime is facilitated, both in Austria and abroad. Moreover,
technical investigation measures are expanded, support of detection and investigation
is enhanced by way of social media and open source intelligence units, and specialist
cyber expertise and structures are developed within prosecution authorities. Effective
strategies for fighting cybercrime and an efficient criminal justice system are fundamental
prerequisites for tackling cyber criminals. What is more, specialist cybercrime offices
are expanded and further developed within the justice system. Since cyber criminals
do not respect international borders, international cooperation on this issue needs to
be continued and enhanced further. Cooperation in the context of Europol’s European

Cybercrime Centre (EC3) and Interpol are absolutely essential. Particular attention is to



be placed on the ongoing negotiations on the upcoming UN Convention on Cybercrime,
which will be held in Vienna and New York in the coming years. Given the complex nature
of the issues at play, structures need to be set up especially at the local level to support

citizens and enterprises quickly and effectively when they fall prey to cybercrime.

Topic area “cyber defence”

Austria's military national defence in cyberspace is an element of Comprehensive National
Defence, which means that it forms part of the Austrian Armed Forces’ responsibility to
ensure national security provision. Expertise and capabilities in the cyber field across the
entire spectrum are to prevent, and defend Austria’s sovereignty against, cyberattacks.
This is a direct contribution to enhancing national resilience and allows the Austrian
Armed Forces to provide assistance in dealing with cyber crises as a part of the national

cybersecurity architecture.

The Austrian Armed Forces and the Federal Ministry of Defence both make strategic
contributions to the national picture of the situation in Austria, help to identify the
sources of cyberattacks, enhance the cyber defence capabilities in cooperation with

national and international partners, and thus bolster the EU’s overall cyber defence.

Cyber defence is a national process under the auspices of the Federal Ministry of
Defence. It encompass all measures intended to prepare Austria for potential cyber-
attacks as well as to maintain and restore Austria’s ability to act in the context of an

attack that might endanger its sovereignty.

51



ue

Topic area “international cooperation”

Cybersecurity needs to be planned beyond our national borders.

With this in mind, the OSCS 2021 takes a European and an international approach to
the issue. Given that most networks in cyberspace are transnational, Austria can only
ensure the security of its digital infrastructure by embedding and strengthening its own
domestic measures as a part of European, regional and international processes. Austria
is continuing to play a proactive role within the EU, the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the NATO-Partnership for
Peace, as well as cultivating and deepening bilateral cybersecurity relationships. As a
part of the present Strategy, Austria will establish itself as a hub for an open, global

exchange on cybersecurity issues.

At the same time, the Strategy will correct asymmetries that currently put the EU and/
or Austria at a disadvantage, particularly those with the potential to affect Austria’s
strategic autonomy and digital sovereignty in areas like data protection, hardware,

software or cloud systems.

Austria is working on the international stage to secure a safe, open cyberspace where
the rule of law is respected, international law applies, and where ensuring that all users

are able to exercise their human rights is a top priority.

53



9 By using their expertise to implement
these measures, stakeholders will make a
major contribution to the success of this
Strategy, and by extension to improving
the overall level of cybersecurity in Austria.



Measures

The specific measures in the List of Measures are essential for the implementation of the
present Strategy. The List of Measures will be updated and published at regular intervals
as far as possible. Each individual measure is associated with at least one of the objectives
set out in Section 3, and assigned to one or more of the target audiences discussed in

Section 4.

The Cyber Security Steering Group will update the List of Measures to take account of the
constantly evolving threat picture and to reflect new challenges as they arise. The Cyber
Security Steering Group will suggest which actions should be assigned to which ministries
in line with the respective ministries’ individual areas of responsibility or be officially
assigned to individual ministries for action by the Secretaries General of the ministries
in question. When the Cyber Security Steering Group suggests that given measures are
relevant to all ministries, individual actions will be agreed following a plenary meeting
of the Secretaries General, before being referred to the relevant heads of the ministries
responsible for cybersecurity for implementation. In the course of the assignment process
of Secretaries General, care must be taken to ensure that all the organisational, financial

and technical requirements are in place.

Guidelines designed to support implementation are provided in the annex.

Measures to be implemented by society as a whole, businesses, the education sector,
or the research and development community can also be proposed by private sector
stakeholders as a part of ongoing cooperation between the state and the private sector
via the Cyber Security Steering Group, the Cyber Security Platform or the Cybersecurity
Competence Community. The Cyber Security Steering Group will then examine whether

the proposed measures should be included in the List of Measures.



60

Measures proposed should be flexible to respond to changes in the current threat situation
and new cybersecurity challenges. Adjustments may also be required as a result of
political, technological, societal and economic developments at the domestic, the EU or

the international levels.

Implementation plan

Individual ministries draw up a detailed implementation plan for each individual measure
that falls within their respective remits. These plans are then submitted to the Cyber
Security Steering Group's Secretariat once every six months or as required. Implemen-
tation plans must set out specific tasks, activities and responsibilities in relation to the
task at hand, as well as quality assurance procedures. Descriptions of these procedures
must specify, as a bare minimum, a timescale for the relevant task and milestones by

which progress can be measured.

To assist ministries in drawing up and implementing these plans, implementation guide-

lines have been included in the annex.

Monitoring

Responsibility for monitoring the implementation of the Strategy lies with the Cyber
Security Steering Group. The Cyber Security Steering Group’s Secretariat retains all the
implementation plans centrally, and uses them as the basis for a progress report, which it
submits to the plenary meeting of the Secretaries General biannually. Current measures

are subject to interim review by the Cyber Security Steering Group once every six months.



Cybersecurity opportunities

Alongside the challenges and threats mentioned in Section 2, cybersecurity also provides

a wide range of opportunities and potential benefits, which should be exploited as far

as possible.

Specifically as far as Austria is concerned, increasing digitalisation would appear to

provide the following opportunities:

Opportunities for society

A cyber-secure environment will make it easier for individuals to partake fully in
society and public life, and encourage the use of cyberspace as a platform to
participate in society. However, this environment cannot be created without secure

means of communication and interaction in both the private and public sectors.

Opportunities for the economy

Cybersecurity is a growth market. As digitalisation continues apace, it is opening
up a wide variety of potential attack vectors and other risks, which have to be
addressed by innovative products and services. In turn, the need for these products
and services means there is scope to open up new sectors and markets within the
economy. In this regard, Austria should place a particular emphasis on developing
sustainable, environmentally-friendly products. Providing businesses with a secure,
innovative environment and resilient digital infrastructure will lay the foundations
for all economic activity in the future. A resilient economy that is well prepared for
cyberattacks will help to strengthen Austria’s position as an attractive location in
which to do business, and will provide long-term competitive advantages in what is

an increasingly complex and digitalised environment.

67



68

3. Opportunities for education, research and development

Demand for qualified specialists is increasing rapidly, and there is an acute need to
expand the range of training available, to improve the overall posture of Austria’s
universities, and to promote innovative projects in this field. Cybersecurity offers
great potential to expand the primary, secondary and tertiary education systems in

an effective and targeted way, and Austria must make use of this.

Opportunities for the public sector

The development and use of secure IT systems will help the public sector to interact
securely and directly with individual citizens and with businesses. A cyber-secure
environment and reliable crisis management systems will serve to bolster trust in
state institutions, and ensure the state is able to act when necessary. International
engagement on cybersecurity issues also serves to strengthen Vienna's position as

a diplomatic hub.



Outlook

Cybersecurity issues are increasingly affecting Austrian citizens in every aspect of their
daily lives. Cyberspace is not static; indeed, it is constantly evolving. Nevertheless,
existing legal frameworks, and in particular the principles of international law, human
rights law and humanitarian international law, still apply in the digital realm. Threats and
challenges in cyberspace can rarely be contained within national borders. This means that
security can only be ensured through a comprehensive cybersecurity policy and close
cooperation with all relevant stakeholders. This is what the OSCS is designed to achieve.
With its list of specific measures to be implemented, it provides a flexible, effective
and inclusive tool for detecting, preventing and dealing with threats and challenges in
cyberspace, with the dual aims of achieving the highest possible level of cybersecurity

and making the most of the opportunities digitalisation brings in every area of our lives.

69



List of abbreviations

Al

BKA
CKM
CKM-KA
CSP
css
E-ID
EC3
ENISA
EU
IKDOK
IT

loT
NATO
NISG
OECD
OpKoord
OSCE
Oscs
SKKM
SMEs
UN

Artificial intelligence

Federal Chancellery

Cyber Crisis Management

Cyber Crisis Management Coordination Committee
Cyber Security Platform

Cyber Security Steering Group

Electronic proof of identity

European Cybercrime Centre

European Union Agency for Cybersecurity

European Union

Inner Circle of the Operative Coordination Structure
Information technology

Internet of Things

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

Network and Information System Security Act
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Operative Coordination Structure

Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Austrian Strategy for Cybersecurity

State Crisis and Disaster Protection Management
Small and medium-sized enterprises

United Nations

73



78

Implementation guidelines

The guidelines below are designed to help and guide ministries to implement individual
measures as straightforwardly and efficiently as possible. All or several of the guidelines

may apply depending on the specific task concerned.

1. Security: The operation and further development of IT systems has be based on an
overarching security philosophy incorporating strategic, organisational and technical
elements (such as security by design). A common approach must be drawn up across

all ministries.

2. Risk-based approach: The OSCS 2021 is based on a holistic and risk-based approach
that aims to identify and prioritise the most likely and most serious risks, and to

develop suitable countermeasures to deal with them.

3. Transparency: The principle of transparency is followed when it comes to imple-
menting measures. This is reflected in the fact that the List of Measures and the

progress report are published whenever possible.
4. Cooperation: Relevant stakeholders work together to implement specific measures.

5. Multi-stakeholder approach: As a part of the cooperative approach, all relevant
interest groups are to be involved in discussions and be given the opportunity to
influence processes and activity wherever possible. It is particularly important to

ensure that measures taken in the public and private sectors are complementary.



10.

Self-responsibility: As long as the ministries’ IT systems are not run on a joint basis,

each ministry is responsible for its own IT systems.

Cost-effectiveness: Measures have to be implemented using existing economic and

financial resources and synergies.

Legal drafting: In order to ensure that legislation on cybersecurity is clear, compre-
hensible, and applied as a part of a cohesive system, legal provisions in this area
should be drafted as clearly and comprehensively as possible and, where this is

permitted under constitutional law, incorporated into a set of regulations.

Conformity with the EU: Priorities and developments at the European level have

to be taken into account when implementing measures.

Ethics: Ethical issues associated with new technologies should be considered on

the basis of existing European and Austrian fundamental values.

79



Legal notice

Media owner, publisher and edi
Federal Chancellery, Ballhausp

itor:
jatz 2, 1010 Vienna

Authors: Federal Chancellery, Department |/8 - Cybersecurity, GovCERT, NIS-Office and ZAS
Produced by: Federal Chancellery

Photo credits: iStock, BKA/And
Layout: BKA Design & Grafik

ly Wenzel (Federal Chancellor Karl Nehammer)

Printed by: Druckwerkstatt Handels GmbH

Vienna, 2021. Last updated: 22

Copyright and liability notice

December 2021

: Extracts from this document may be reproduced provided the

source is acknowledged. Any other use requires the written permission of the media owner.
Please note that no warranty is extended in relation to any of the details contained in the
present publication. Although every care has been taken to ensure the information is accurate,
neither the Federal Chancellery, nor and the author(s) of the present document accept any
liability in relation to its content. Any statements regarding legal matters represent the personal

opinions of the author(s). Such

statements are not legally binding, and do not prejudice the

applicability of existing jurisprudence or case law under any circumstances.
Feedback: Please send any comments you may have about this publication to

cybersecurity@bka.gv.at.



