
Lee Hsien Loong
October 2021
Acknowledgements
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
Copyright © 2021 
by Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
All rights reserved. 
 
ISBN:  978-981-18-2258-2
Cyber Security Agency of Singapore 
www.csa.gov.sg 
Designed by:
APT811 Design & Innovation Agency
www.apt811.com
We would like to thank the following individuals, groups, and agencies  
for their valuable input and support over the course of developing the  
Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021: 
•	 Dr Benjamin Ang, Centre of Excellence for National Security,  
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies 
•	 Mr Bruce W. McConnell, EastWest Institute 
•	 Prof Ciaran Martin, Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford 
•	 Mr Christopher C. Krebs, Krebs Stamos Group
•	 Mr Christopher Painter, Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace 
•	 Mr James Andrew Lewis, Center for Strategic & International Studies 
•	 Dr Shashi Jayakumar, Centre of Excellence for National Security,  
S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies 
•	 The Singapore Cyber Security Inter Association  
•	 The Cyber Security Awareness Alliance 
•	 The Infocomm Media Development Authority 
•	 The Ministry of Communications and Information 
•	 The Ministry of Defence 
•	 The Ministry of Home Affairs 
•	 The Personal Data Protection Commission 
•	 The Singapore Police Force 
•	 The Smart Nation and Digital Government Group 
Five years ago, we launched the first Singapore 
Cybersecurity Strategy. The world is now 
a different place. Digital technology has 
transformed how we live, work, and play. Smart 
homes and devices are becoming mainstream; 
retail stalls are pitching their wares over 
livestreaming apps; we PayNow each other 
instead of using cash. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has accelerated these trends further.
Digital technology is central to our COVID-19 
response. Technology enables us to trace 
contacts effectively and efficiently, monitor 
patients’ health remotely, and ensure 
compliance with stay-at-home notices. Many 
solutions were developed locally to help us 
emerge stronger from the pandemic. 
Singapore must continue to exploit digital 
technology fully to grow and develop. At 
the same time, we must be vigilant about 
the risks. The more we digitalise, the more 
exposed we become to the growing threats 
in cyberspace. The same technologies that 
improve our lives can be misused to disrupt 
our lives, sow mistrust, and deepen social 
divisions. Cyberattacks can also do physical 
damage to business operations and essential 
infrastructure, and pose real-world threats to 
lives and livelihoods. 
Digitalisation and cybersecurity are thus  
two sides of the same coin. As we push for 
digitalisation, we must also raise our cybersecurity 
levels to protect ourselves from new technological 
exploits and malicious actors. 
This updated Cybersecurity Strategy charts the 
next stage in Singapore’s journey to becoming 
a more cyber-resilient nation. We will actively 
defend our cyberspace, simplify cybersecurity 
for end-users, and promote the development 
of international cyber norms and standards. 
As the cyber environment is evolving rapidly, 
implementing this strategy will demand much of 
our people. That is why we are investing heavily 
to upskill practising professionals and to support 
individuals keen on pursuing a cybersecurity 
career. If we can do all this well, we can 
confidently unleash our full digital potential.
As the world rides the digitalisation wave, let us 
work together towards a trusted and resilient 
cyberspace so that everyone can benefit from 
the opportunities in a digitally connected world.
PRIME MINISTER’S FOREWORD

Overview of the Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
1
Introduction: Singapore’s Cyber Operating Landscape
5
Chapter 1: Build Resilient Infrastructure
13
Enable a coordinated approach to national cybersecurity with Critical Information 
Infrastructures (CIIs) at its core
16
Ensure government systems are secure and resilient
18
Safeguard important entities and systems beyond CIIs
20
Chapter 2: Enable a Safer Cyberspace
21
Secure digital infrastructure, devices, and applications that power our digital economy
24
Safeguard our cyberspace activities
25
Empower our cyber-savvy population for a healthy digital way of life
27
Chapter 3: Enhance International Cyber Cooperation
31
Advance the development and implementation of voluntary, non-binding norms, which sit 
alongside international law
35
Strengthen the global cybersecurity posture through capacity-building initiatives and 
the development of technical and interoperable cybersecurity standards
37
Contribute to international efforts to combat cross-border cyber threats
39
Chapter 4: Develop a Vibrant Cybersecurity Ecosystem
41
Develop advanced capabilities for economic growth and national security
44
Innovate to build world-class products and services
45
Grow our cybersecurity market
47
Chapter 5: Grow a Robust Cyber Talent Pipeline
49
Support youths, women, and mid-career professionals to pursue a cybersecurity career
53
Create an upskilling culture for a globally competitive workforce
55
Foster a dynamic sector with strong professional communities
56
Conclusion
57
Glossary
59
Contents

1
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
2
SINGAPORE 
CYBERSECURITY 
STRATEGY 2021
A secure cyberspace underpins our national 
security, powers a digital economy, and 
protects our digital way of life. 
Singapore launched our first Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 
in 2016 (‘Strategy 2016’), which helped lay the foundations of our 
cybersecurity efforts today. As our strategic and technological 
environment has changed significantly over the past five years, 
we have reviewed and refreshed our cybersecurity strategy to 
address new and emerging cyber-threats.
With a robust cybersecurity workforce and a vibrant cybersecurity 
ecosystem as key enablers, the Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 
2021 (‘Strategy 2021’) lays out our plans to strengthen the security 
and resilience of our digital infrastructure and enable a safer 
cyberspace to support our digital way of life. It also articulates 
how Singapore could play an outsized role in the digital domain 
despite being a small country, to support an open, secure, stable, 
accessible, peaceful, and interoperable cyberspace. 
Overview of the 

3
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
4
Develop a Vibrant 
Cybersecurity Ecosystem
	• Enable a coordinated approach to national 
cybersecurity with CIIs at its core
	• Ensure government systems are secure 
and resilient
	• Safeguard important entities and systems 
beyond CIIs
	• Support youths, women, and mid-
career professionals to pursue a 
cybersecurity career
	• Create an upskilling culture for a 
globally competitive workforce
	• Foster a dynamic sector with strong 
professional communities
	• Develop advanced capabilities 
for economic growth and national 
security
	• Innovate to build world-class 
products and services
	• Grow our cybersecurity market
STRATEGIC 
PILLARS
FOUNDATIONAL 
ENABLERS
OVERVIEW
A TRUSTED AND RESILIENT CYBERSPACE
Build Resilient Infrastructure
Enable a Safer Cyberspace
Enhance International Cyber Cooperation
Grow a Robust  
Cyber Talent Pipeline
	• Secure digital infrastructure, devices, 
and applications that power our digital 
economy
	• Safeguard our cyberspace activities
	• Empower our cyber-savvy population  
for a healthy digital way of life
	• Advance the development and 
implementation of voluntary, non-binding 
norms, which sit alongside international law
	• Strengthen the global cybersecurity 
posture through capacity-building 
initiatives and the development of technical 
and interoperable cybersecurity standards
	• Contribute to international efforts to 
combat cross-border cyber threats

5
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
6
As Singapore harnesses digital 
technology to improve lives and 
livelihoods for all, cybersecurity 
has become a necessity and a key 
enabler for our digital economy 
and digital way of life. 
Singapore takes cyber threats seriously. Our cybersecurity journey 
started with the first Infocomm Security Masterplan in 2005 and 
the formation of the Singapore Infocomm Technology Security 
Authority (SITSA) in 2009. In 2015, the Cyber Security Agency of 
Singapore (CSA) was set up as the central agency to oversee and 
coordinate all aspects of cybersecurity for the nation.  
 
CSA published the first Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy in 2016, 
which had sought to:
(i)	
Build a resilient infrastructure;  
(ii)	
Create a safer cyberspace;  
(iii)	 Develop a vibrant cybersecurity ecosystem; and  
(iv)	 Strengthen international partnerships. 
Scan here to learn more about Singapore’s 
cybersecurity journey since 2016!
INTRODUCTION
SINGAPORE’S 
CYBER OPERATING 
LANDSCAPE

7
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
8
Key Shifts in our  
Cyber Operating Environment
Looking ahead, there are several emerging 
technologies that may disrupt current 
approaches towards cybersecurity.
For example, edge computing, enabled by 
5G, cloud computing, and ubiquitous access 
to digital devices, will fundamentally change 
our network environment. This requires 
a mindset shift, as we move away from 
perimeter defence towards a zero-trust 
cybersecurity model. Quantum technologies 
will also disrupt the cryptographic methods 
underpinning cybersecurity today. 
On the flip side, technologies such as 
artificial intelligence and quantum 
computing also present us with new ways 
to secure our digital assets. 
We are entering an age where the digital and 
physical realms converge. Cyber disruptions 
can spill over to the physical domain with 
real-world consequences. In 2021 alone, we 
have seen the disruption of hospitals, oil 
pipelines, and manufacturing facilities in 
various countries because of cyberattacks. 
Growing cyber-physical risks are not limited 
to the industry; these risks are also creeping 
into our everyday lives with the proliferation 
of smart devices and internet-enabled 
products in our homes. 
We must therefore need to ensure our 
CIIs and other important systems are well 
protected and resilient. Existing policy and 
legislative frameworks must also be fit-for-
purpose to address these risks. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated 
digitalisation; businesses and individuals 
are increasingly dependent on the smooth 
running of digital infrastructure and services. 
This has vastly expanded the attack surface 
for Singapore and Singaporeans, exposing 
more vulnerabilities to be exploited. 
Cyber threat actors take advantage of this to 
launch cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are not 
only growing in volume; they are also growing 
in sophistication. 
We will work with businesses and individuals 
so that they are equipped to mitigate and 
manage cybersecurity risks, so that they can 
digitalise safely and securely.
Digital technologies are increasingly 
perceived as a key determinant in the 
distribution of power in the international 
system. The digital domain has thus become 
a new arena for geopolitical contestation. 
States are in a race to develop first-mover 
advantages over key digital technologies. 
Technical standards-setting bodies are 
increasingly receiving political attention. 
Singapore must remain steadfast in our 
commitment to an open, secure, stable, 
accessible, peaceful, and interoperable 
cyberspace and actively work towards 
this vision, in order to navigate these 
geopolitical tensions. 
Disruptive Technologies
Growing Cyber-Physical Risks
Ubiquitous Digital Connectivity
Increased Geopolitical 
Tensions in Cyberspace
INTRODUCTION
Singapore’s Cyber Operating Landscape
The digital domain is one that is rapidly evolving. In the past five years, 
Singapore has observed four key shifts in our cyber operating environment:

9
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
10
SINGAPORE’S APPROACH
SINGAPORE’S APPROACH
OBJECTIVES
OBJECTIVES
Regulation will continue to be a key lever. 
In Strategy 2021, we will explore expanding 
the Government’s regulatory remit under 
the Cybersecurity Act to include entities 
and systems beyond CIIs. 
However, a purely regulatory approach 
could engender a compliance mindset, 
which is not desirable in a fast-
evolving environment. Enterprises and 
organisations should instead adopt a 
risk management mindset. Strategy 
2021 will therefore also seek to nudge 
enterprises and organisations to invest in 
cybersecurity to thrive in a digital world. 
The Government will take the lead 
to secure the digital infrastructure 
that powers our digital economy, and 
support the development of a healthy 
digital environment. Recognising that 
cybersecurity can seem daunting to many, 
the Government will also seek to make it 
easier for everyone to secure their devices 
and use secure applications.
Enterprises, organisations, and individuals 
must play their part too. Enterprises and 
organisations should include cybersecurity 
as part of their risk management 
framework and strengthen their 
cybersecurity posture. Individuals should 
practise good cyber hygiene and stay 
vigilant against cyber threats.
Singapore will advance the development 
and implementation of voluntary, non-
binding norms, which sit alongside 
international law. We will also advocate the 
development and adoption of technical and 
interoperable standards. Eventually, this 
will allow us to work towards a rules-based 
multilateral order with agreed principles for 
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. 
We will also step up operational cooperation 
with our international partners to combat 
cross-border cyber threats. Singapore will 
also support capacity-building programmes 
to help raise the global and regional levels 
of cybersecurity. 
Foster an open, secure, stable, accessible, 
peaceful, and interoperable cyberspace
To develop a vibrant cybersecurity ecosystem, the Government will galvanise the cybersecurity industry 
and academia to develop advanced capabilities, build world-class products and services, and grow our 
cybersecurity market. The Government will invest in cybersecurity research and innovation. We will 
also establish entrepreneurship programmes, which stakeholders can leverage to develop Made-in-
Singapore solutions.
Build a cybersecurity ecosystem 
underpinned by research and innovation 
for our security and economic needs
The Government will work closely with our schools to educate students in cybersecurity and nurture 
budding cybersecurity enthusiasts. The Government will also partner the industry and Institutes of 
Higher Learning (IHLs) to develop skills and competency frameworks toward structured career paths 
for cybersecurity professionals. 
In line with the national SkillsFuture movement, the Government will also encourage individuals interested 
in cybersecurity to further their skills through programmes offered by industry and training institutes.
Develop and sustain a strong  
cybersecurity workforce to meet  
our security and economic needs
Compared to Strategy 2016, 
Strategy 2021 takes a more 
proactive stance to address 
threats, broadens our scope of 
protection, and seeks to develop 
deeper partnerships with 
industry and other organisations 
to adapt to the changes in our 
cyber operating environment. 
Strategy 2021 also places greater 
emphasis on workforce and 
ecosystem development as key 
enablers of our cybersecurity. 
How are we 
adapting to a 
changing cyber 
landscape?
STRATEGIC PILLARS
FOUNDATIONAL ENABLERS
Strengthen the security and resilience 
of our digital infrastructure 
Create a cleaner and healthier 
digital environment 
INTRODUCTION
Singapore’s Cyber Operating Landscape
Build Resillient 
Infrastructure
Enable a Safer 
Cyberspace
Enhance International 
Cyber Cooperation
Develop a Vibrant 
Cybersecurity Ecosystem
Grow a Robust  
Cyber Talent Pipeline

11
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
12
I am...
I can...
Strengthen the  
security of CIIs by: 
Contribute to a  
healthier digital  
environment by: 
Strengthen  
my organisation’s  
cybersecurity posture by: 
What is my role?
A software or  
hardware vendor 
A leader of an 
enterprise or 
organisation
A CII owner
	• Adopting a risk-based approach 
towards cybersecurity
	• Incorporating cybersecurity 
in my enterprise’s risk 
management framework
	• Leveraging the CII Supply Chain 
Programme to manage vendor 
cybersecurity risks
	• Using the Operational 
Technology (OT) Cybersecurity 
Competency Framework as a 
tool to establish processes, 
structures, or jobs to manage 
OT cybersecurity within my 
organisation
	• Equipping my employees 
with cybersecurity skills and 
knowledge to build secure-
by-design software and 
hardware products
	• Applying to get my 
products certified under 
the Cybersecurity Labelling 
Scheme
	• Adopting a risk-based 
approach towards 
cybersecurity
	• Incorporating cybersecurity 
in my organisation’s risk 
management framework
	• Applying for the SG Cyber 
Safe Trustmark for my 
organisation 
	• Using the resources and 
toolkits developed by  
CSA to raise cybersecurity 
awareness throughout  
my organisation
Contribute to  
our cybersecurity  
ecosystem by: 
Learn more about 
cybersecurity by: 
Take responsibility for my  
own cybersecurity by: 
A cybersecurity  
professional or 
researcher
A student
An individual who uses 
digital technology for 
work or play 
	• Leveraging the National 
Cybersecurity R&D 
Programme to develop 
advanced cybersecurity 
capabilities 
	• Leveraging initiatives such 
as the Cybersecurity Call 
for Innovation to create new 
innovative cybersecurity 
solutions
	• Working with local industry 
associations on community 
initiatives 
	• Participating in SG Cyber 
Youth programmes, 
such as the Youth Cyber 
Exploration Programme or 
the Cybersecurity Career 
Mentoring Programme 
	• Participating in cyber 
sparring and training under 
the SG Cyber Olympians 
programme
	• Practising good cyber hygiene
	• Adopting the tips in the  
SG Cyber Safe campaigns 
	• Using the appropriate 
cybersecurity solutions to 
protect my devices 
Cybersecurity is a team sport, and everyone has a part to play. The Government will take the 
lead in rolling out initiatives to keep Singapore’s cyberspace safe. However, this Strategy is not 
just a government blueprint; it is a call to action for all stakeholders to leverage resources and 
opportunities outlined in this Strategy to play their part and contribute to the nation’s cybersecurity. 
The Government will play the role of team captain, guiding and empowering enterprises, 
organisations, and individuals to collectively work towards a safe and secure cyberspace. 
INTRODUCTION
Singapore’s Cyber Operating Landscape

13
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
14
With increasing digitalisation, CIIs that were previously isolated 
from the Internet are now increasingly linked to other digital 
systems, exposing them to cyber vulnerabilities and threats. At 
the same time, threat actors are becoming more sophisticated 
and are honing their craft to exploit any vulnerability they can find 
to disrupt our digital way of life.
The Government is committed to the security and resilience of 
our CIIs, even as we push for more digitalisation. Beyond CIIs, 
the Government will also seek to raise the cybersecurity posture 
of other digital systems and infrastructure that could impact 
Singaporeans’ lives and livelihoods. 
Strengthen the security 
and resilience of our digital 
infrastructure
We rely on Critical Information Infrastructures 
(CIIs) for the provision of essential services,  
such as telecommunications, energy, healthcare, 
and banking. 
CHAPTER 1
BUILD RESILIENT
INFRASTRUCTURE
GOAL

15
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
16
The Government will work closely with CII owners, the cybersecurity industry 
and key digital infrastructure owners to enable a coordinated approach to 
national cybersecurity. We will also ensure that government systems providing 
key services for our citizens are secure and resilient. The Government will also 
look beyond CIIs and work towards safeguarding other entities and systems that 
provide important services that support our digital economy and way of life.
Enable a coordinated approach 
to national cybersecurity with 
CIIs at its core
To ensure our essential services are well-protected 
from cybersecurity threats, we will evolve our 
policy approach to defend against sophisticated 
threat actors. We must also continue to strengthen 
capabilities to protect, detect, respond, and recover 
from malicious cyber activities. We will also ensure 
that cyber-physical risks are well managed. 
The Government will implement a layered 
and coordinated approach to national cyber 
defence. CII owners will be encouraged to 
adopt a zero-trust cybersecurity posture 
for critical systems. For other services and 
infrastructure whose disruption could have 
significant knock-on effects on the nation, 
a risk-based approach will be adopted 
to strengthen the cybersecurity of these 
systems. For example, CSA is developing 
a CII Supply Chain Programme to provide 
recommendations for all stakeholders to 
manage cybersecurity risks in the supply 
chain. In addition, we also seek to change 
mindsets, such that cybersecurity will be 
viewed as an enterprise risk management 
issue, as opposed to a compliance issue. 
Evolve our policy approach to 
defend against sophisticated 
threat actors 
Cybersecurity is enabled by strong 
capabilities. The Government will strengthen 
our technical capabilities to detect and 
analyse malicious cyber activities to better 
defend against such threats. This includes 
the development of a Cyber Fusion Platform 
that will allow the Government to conduct 
investigation with enhanced speed and 
efficiency. To strengthen our response and 
recovery, the Government will also implement 
initiatives such as the new National Cyber 
Security Command Centre. We will also work 
with CII owners and other organisations to 
address the various people, process, and 
technology challenges in cybersecurity.
Strengthen capabilities to protect, 
detect, respond, and recover from 
malicious cyber activities
CHAPTER  1
Build Resilient Infrastructure
In Strategy 2016, the Government focused on strengthening the cyber resilience 
of our CIIs. The Cybersecurity Act was passed in 2018 and serves as the legislative 
framework to safeguard our CIIs. 
While we continue to strengthen these areas, Strategy 2021 also seeks to:
WHAT’S NEW?
Leverage synergies across the nation
This includes strengthening our technical capabilities and 
enhancing coordination across the Government in order to 
act with greater effectiveness, speed, and agility.
Broaden our scope of protection beyond CIIs
We want to strengthen the cybersecurity posture of other 
key entities whose compromise or disruption have significant 
knock-on effects to the wider economy and society.
Address growing cyber-physical risks
As the physical and digital worlds continue to converge, we 
want to ensure our policy and legislative frameworks remain 
fit-for-purpose to manage cyber-physical risks.

17
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
18
CIIs are digital systems that support the delivery of essential 
services. Today, CIIs have been identified from 11 critical 
sectors — Aviation, Banking & Finance, Energy, Government, 
Healthcare, Infocomm, Land Transport, Maritime, Media, 
Security & Emergency Services, and Water.
To ensure that our essential services are not disrupted by 
cyber threats, the Government has put in place a three-tier 
framework to strengthen the cyber resilience of CIIs.
•	
CSA, as the independent national authority on 
cybersecurity, monitors and regulates the CII sectors. 
At the same time, CSA actively supports sector leads 
and CII owners to improve their situational awareness 
and build up their capabilities.  
•	
Each CII sector has a sector lead, who works closely 
with CSA. They are the natural regulators of the 
CII owners and have a good grasp of the unique 
operating and business environment — and risks — 
of their respective sectors. They are best placed to 
provide guidance on the appropriate balance point of 
cybersecurity, usability, and cost.  
•	
At the organisational level, CII owners are responsible 
for managing their cybersecurity risks and are the first 
line defenders and responders. 
Critical Information 
Infrastructures in Singapore
The effects of cyberattacks are 
no longer contained in the digital 
domain. They are spilling into 
the physical realm, as evidenced 
by ransomware attacks on the 
Colonial Pipeline Company in 
the US and healthcare services 
in Ireland and New Zealand. 
Our policy and legislative 
frameworks must evolve and 
adapt to mitigate cyber-physical 
risks. This includes reviewing 
the Cybersecurity Act, as well 
as introducing policy initiatives 
such as the OT Cybersecurity 
Masterplan and OT Cybersecurity 
Competency Framework. 
Ensure policy and 
legislative frameworks 
remain fit-for-purpose 
to address growing 
cyber-physical risks
Ensure government systems 
are secure and resilient
To enable public service digitalisation, the Government will ensure that all 
government systems — including both CIIs and non-CII systems — are resilient, 
protected, and trusted by its users. Today, all government systems comply with 
tailored cybersecurity policies that are reviewed periodically. We will also modernise 
the cybersecurity architecture of government systems to stay ahead of technological 
developments. Cybersecurity is not only about technology, but also about people 
and organisational processes. We will therefore also raise the level of cybersecurity 
competency across Government. We hope that the Government’s risk-based 
approach towards cybersecurity can serve as a guide for other organisations and 
enterprises looking to strengthen their cybersecurity posture.
Instructional Manual 8 (IM8) is the management 
tool used in Government to safeguard 
government ICT & Smart Systems (ICT&SS) 
assets. The IM8 Policy on Security establishes 
tailored security hygiene practices for 
government systems, based on a system’s 
classification and criticality. The Smart Nation 
and Digital Government Group (SNDGG) 
supports the implementation of IM8 security 
controls by providing consultancy services and 
deploying Chief Information Security Officers 
(CISOs) across Government. The Government 
also conducts regular penetration testing on 
government systems as part of the IM8 audit, 
identifying vulnerabilities to be addressed 
before potential exploitation. 
The Government is implementing the 
Government Trust-based Architecture 
(GTbA) that translates zero-trust 
principles to the Government context, 
thereby strengthening the security of 
applications and systems.  
 
To complement the GTbA, the Government 
will operationalise the Government 
Cybersecurity Operations Centre (GCSOC) 
that can provide real-time monitoring, 
increase Government’s situational 
awareness, and allow a more rapid and 
accurate incident response.
Review cyber policies and 
enforce a tiered set of 
requirements in Government
Modernise the 
cybersecurity architecture 
in Government
CHAPTER  1
Build Resilient Infrastructure

19
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
20
The Government Bug Bounty Programme (GBBP) is 
a programme that invites established cybersecurity 
researchers to conduct targeted assessments on 
critical government systems with a bounty reward 
for critical vulnerabilities discovered. On the other 
hand, the Vulnerability Disclosure Programme (VDP) 
is a crowdsourcing platform for the public to identify 
and report vulnerabilities in government internet-
facing mobile and web-based applications. Through 
this platform, SNDGG encourages responsible 
reporting of any suspected vulnerability while 
strengthening the sense of collective ownership over 
the cybersecurity of government systems. 
Building on the success of the GBBP and VDP, SNDGG 
launched the new Vulnerability Rewards Program 
(VRP) in 2021. Together, the three crowdsourced 
vulnerability discovery programmes supplement 
Govtech’s suite of initiatives to safeguard 
Government systems. 
The Government Bug Bounty 
Programme and Vulnerability 
Disclosure Programme 
Vulnerability Rewards  
Programme (VRP)
Vulnerability Disclosure 
Programme (VDP)
Safeguard important 
entities and systems 
beyond CIIs
With increasing reliance on digital infrastructure and services, the Government must 
look beyond CIIs to support the cybersecurity of other entities, especially if their 
disruption will have significant knock-on effects to the rest of Singapore. We will 
also address the risks of new digital operating models, so that Singaporeans can 
confidently unlock the benefits of new technologies with peace of mind.
While cyber regulations around the world are 
largely focused on preventing the disruption 
of essential services, there are some 
systems and entities that do not deliver 
essential services but can nevertheless 
have a significant impact on Singapore if 
disrupted or compromised. In this regard, 
we must likewise raise their cybersecurity 
posture to protect that our digital economy 
and way of life. The Government will study 
the wider digital landscape and ensure that 
these significant systems and entities are 
adequately protected against malicious 
cyber threats.
Digital technologies will always evolve, 
and we must be ready to adapt to the 
new operating models that emerge as 
a result. For example, cloud services 
are increasingly important for the 
provision of digital services supporting 
key business functions and operations. 
The Government will study the public 
policy implications of emerging digital 
operating models and seek to address 
the risks as appropriate. 
Raise cybersecurity posture 
of important systems and 
entities beyond CIIs
Address cybersecurity 
risks arising from new 
digital operating models
CHAPTER  1
Build Resilient Infrastructure
As we become more reliant on 
digital systems, the Government 
must ensure that public officers 
are well equipped with the 
skills and knowledge to keep 
themselves cyber safe. The 
Government will also develop 
a Cybersecurity Functional 
Competency Framework to 
provide clear development 
milestones for government 
cybersecurity specialists. 
In addition, SNDGG has 
launched the GovTech Digital 
Academy that will provide 
customised cybersecurity 
training programmes for ICT&SS 
professionals in Government.
Raise the level 
of cybersecurity 
competency across 
Government

21
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
22
Create a cleaner and healthier 
digital environment
Digitalisation has changed the way we  
live, work, and play. Cybersecurity is a  
key enabler for Singaporeans to digitalise 
confidently and safely.
Our goal is to create a healthy digital environment. Just as how good 
physical hygiene goes a long way to keep us healthy, a cleaner digital 
environment and good cyber hygiene practices will help keep us 
safe in the digital world. In 2020, the Government launched the Safer 
Cyberspace Masterplan, which articulated our approach to creating 
a clean and healthy digital environment. The Masterplan remains 
relevant to Strategy 2021. 
Scan to read the  
Safer Cyberspace Masterplan
CHAPTER 2
ENABLE A  
SAFER CYBERSPACE
GOAL

23
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
24
Everyone has a role to play in enabling a safer cyberspace. The Government 
will champion the effort but enterprises, individuals and the wider community 
must also come on board. Together, we can work towards securing the digital 
infrastructure, devices, and applications that powers our digital economy; 
safeguarding our cyberspace activities; and empowering our cyber-savvy 
population for a healthy digital way of life.
Strategy 2016 had sought to raise awareness and encourage adoption of good 
cyber hygiene. Despite the high level of awareness of the need for cybersecurity, 
adoption of cyber safe practices amongst enterprises and individuals remains low. 
As articulated in the Safer Cyberspace Masterplan, the Government seeks to raise 
the general level of cybersecurity in Singapore by:
Offering cybersecurity to the masses
The Government will protect our national 
Internet infrastructure such that enterprises and 
individuals in Singapore are protected from most 
online threats ever reaching them. 
Simplifying cybersecurity for end-users
The Government will make the adoption of 
cybersecurity solutions easy and convenient. 
The Government will also work with the industry 
to develop innovative cybersecurity solutions 
for end-users to plug and play.
Secure digital infrastructure, devices, and 
applications that power our digital economy
Apart from securing key digital infrastructure as mentioned in Chapter 1, we can 
protect Singapore and Singaporeans by minimising vulnerabilities in our Internet 
architecture. However, not all threats can be detected or prevented at the national 
level. We will also empower individuals to secure their devices and work with 
enterprises to strengthen the security of their applications. 
The Government can 
provide an additional 
layer of protection to all 
Singaporeans by securing 
our national Internet 
infrastructure. For example, 
the Government is working 
with the Internet Service 
Providers to implement 
the Domain Name System 
Security Extension 
(DNSSEC) protocol across 
local Internet domains. This 
augments the security of the 
Internet, thereby preventing 
cyber threats from ever 
reaching end-users.
Vulnerabilities are 
commonly found in devices 
and endpoints. Due to the 
competitive ICT market, 
many manufacturers 
often prioritise features, 
usability, or cost over the 
security of the device. The 
Government is encouraging 
businesses to invest in the 
security of their products. 
For example, we launched 
the Cybersecurity Labelling 
Scheme in 2020, which 
allows consumers to easily 
assess the level of security 
of a smart device. 
Protect  
Singapore’s  
Internet 
infrastructure
Secure user 
devices and 
endpoints
CHAPTER  2
Enable a Safer Cyberspace
Applications are the interface 
between the user and 
cyberspace. Malicious actors 
can leverage vulnerabilities 
in applications to access 
users’ sensitive information. 
To incentivise Software-as-
a-Service (SaaS) platforms 
to develop more secure 
applications, we will be 
looking into initiatives such 
as labelling schemes for 
SaaS products. We will also 
strengthen our partnership 
with the private sector, 
which manages most digital 
applications, to ensure that 
their products are secure. 
Safeguard 
enterprise 
applications
WHAT’S NEW?

25
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
26
Safeguard our cyberspace activities
A cyber breach is a matter of when, not if. We must therefore be able to quickly 
detect and remediate such breaches. As mentioned in Chapter 1, the Government will 
strengthen capabilities to protect, detect, respond, and recover from malicious cyber 
activities. We will also enable enterprises to protect themselves against cyber threats 
and support them to put in place baseline standards of data protection.
The Government will support enterprises by 
making cybersecurity resources available 
— from free self-help tools to cost-effective 
solutions provided in partnership with the 
cybersecurity industry. For example, as we 
become more reliant on mobile devices 
for work and leisure, cyber criminals will 
also increasingly target these devices. The 
Government will work with the industry 
to develop a mobile endpoint solution for 
citizens to secure their mobile phone from 
threats, while upholding personal privacy. 
Enable enterprises to protect 
themselves against cyber threats
The Government will enhance our offering of 
tools and self-help platforms for enterprises to 
strengthen data protection. The Government 
will also work with the industry to provide data 
protection services such as Data Protection-
as-a-Service for Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs). This will provide SMEs with limited 
resources the support they need to meet data 
protection requirements. 
Support organisations to put in place 
baseline standard of data protection
The Government is committed to 
supporting our enterprises to use data 
responsibly to derive business value.
The Better Data Driven Business (BDDB) 
programme provides free tools and 
guidance to help enterprises better 
safeguard their customers’ personal 
data while using data effectively to 
remain competitive. The BDDB aims 
to support SMEs that are new to data 
analysis, as well as SMEs looking to 
leverage data for more complex use 
cases. The BDDB will also be a one-stop 
shop for guidance on data protection 
practices, as well as professional data 
protection services for enterprises. 
The Infocomm Media Development 
Authority (IMDA) and the Personal 
Data Protection Commission (PDPC) 
have also been guiding industry in 
developing and deploying trustworthy 
artificial intelligence (AI) systems. 
Past initiatives include the Model 
AI Governance Framework, the 
Implementation and Self-Assessment 
Guide for Organisations (ISAGO), 
Using data and artificial intelligence responsibly 
CHAPTER  2
Enable a Safer Cyberspace
Model AI Governance 
Testing Framework
Better Data Driven Business
and two volumes of Compendium of 
Use Cases. IMDA and PDPC have also 
developed a draft AI governance testing 
framework and are working with like-
minded partners to make this a Minimum 
Viable Product (MVP). It is envisioned that 
this MVP will support industry in meeting 
the specifications of key AI governance 
frameworks, such as those from European 
Union, the OECD, and Singapore.

CHAPTER  2
Enable a Safer Cyberspace
27
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
28
The Government also raises awareness 
amongst the more vulnerable groups 
of the population. The SG Cyber Safe 
Seniors Programme that was launched 
by CSA, SPF, and IMDA in 2021 aims to 
reach 50,000 seniors over two years. 
The programme will cover topics such 
as cyber threats, online scams, and 
cyber tips in four languages through 
webinars, publications and face-to-
face engagements. The Government 
also reaches out to students through 
programmes such as the National 
Police Cadet Corps (NPCC) Cybercrime 
Prevention Programme and the SG 
Cyber Safe Students Programme.
Private sector stakeholders play an 
important role. To tackle cybercrime, 
the SPF established the Alliance of 
Public Private Cybercrime Stakeholders 
(APPACT) in 2017. APPACT has since 
grown to a 59-member strong alliance 
across nine industries, including 
banks, e-commerce, and social media 
platforms. The SPF conducts regular 
outreach and discussions with APPACT 
partners to chart new ways to tackle 
cybercrime. With APPACT members’ 
efforts and vigilance in preventing and 
detecting cybercrime, there have been 
numerous success stories arising from 
the close partnerships forged via this 
public-private industry platform.
Empower our cyber-savvy population 
for a healthy digital way of life
A lack of awareness or lax attitudes towards cybersecurity among end-users can 
be the Achilles’ heel of even the most secured systems. To empower our population 
to take charge of their online safety, we will raise awareness and change attitudes 
on cybersecurity and promote adoption of good cyber practices.
The Government will roll out national 
cybersecurity awareness campaigns to 
drive greater awareness and encourage 
adoption of good cyber hygiene practices. 
The Government will also organise targeted 
outreach for specific segments of the 
population such as students, working adults, 
and seniors. We will do this in collaboration 
with the private sector to expand our reach. 
In addition to raising awareness, the 
Government will support and encourage 
individuals and enterprises to protect 
themselves online. For example, 
CSA’s Go Safe Online portal provides 
actionable advice and tips for the public 
and enterprises. CSA will also launch a 
voluntary SG Cyber Safe Trustmark and 
cyber hygiene mark for enterprises. The 
marks will allow enterprises to have a 
clear picture of their cybersecurity level, 
and reassure their customers that their 
systems are secure. 
Raise awareness and change 
attitudes on cybersecurity
Promote adoption of 
good cyber practices
The Government undertakes regular 
campaigns to raise awareness on 
cybersecurity and combat cybercrime. 
For example, CSA launched the “Better 
Cyber Safe than Sorry” campaign in 
June 2021 to promote and encourage the 
adoption of good cyber hygiene practices. 
The Singapore Police Force (SPF) also 
organises a nationwide anti-scam public 
education campaign annually. 
Working together to strengthen our collective 
cyber resilience
CSA’s “Better Cyber Safe than Sorry” Campaign
The NPCC Cybercrime Prevention Programme 
(photo taken before COVID-19)

29
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
30
Cybersecurity can be a competitive 
advantage. Businesses are digitalising 
faster than ever; cybersecurity will be 
key to securing the trust of consumers, 
especially given the increasing 
frequency of cyber breaches. 
CSA is introducing a voluntary SG 
Cyber Safe Trustmark, which will  
serve as a mark of distinction to 
recognise companies with good 
cybersecurity measures. This will 
allow customers to make an informed 
choice on the companies to engage, 
based on their cybersecurity posture.
SG Cyber Safe Trustmark and cyber hygiene mark
CHAPTER  2
Enable a Safer Cyberspace
For smaller enterprises that 
may not have dedicated IT or 
cybersecurity expertise, CSA 
is developing a separate cyber 
hygiene mark. This cyber hygiene 
mark is designed to be practical 
and implementable, focusing 
on basic cyber hygiene, so that 
businesses are better protected 
from common cyberattacks. 
Both the Trustmark and 
cyber hygiene mark are being 
developed in consultation with 
industry practitioners.

31
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
32
ENHANCE 
INTERNATIONAL 
CYBER COOPERATION
We have seen significant cyberattacks spill over country lines, 
from the SolarWinds breach, to the Kaseya Virtual System 
Administrator (VSA) attack. 
A resilient infrastructure and a safer cyberspace support our 
domestic resilience against cyber threats. However, we also need 
to engage and collaborate with our international partners to work 
towards the longer-term objective of a rules-based multilateral 
order in cyberspace, and develop mechanisms and policies to 
raise the global baseline level of cybersecurity. 
Foster an open, secure, stable, 
accessible, peaceful, and 
interoperable cyberspace
CHAPTER 3
GOAL
Cyber threats are international and cross-border.

33
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
34
The implementation of Strategy 2016 saw Singapore step up our participation 
in international cyber policy discussions. We have strengthened collaboration 
with our Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) counterparts to 
improve the collective cybersecurity of the region and forged strong bilateral 
cybersecurity partnerships with other international partners.
As cybersecurity gains traction in global conversations, Singapore will raise 
our level of participation in international cyber policy discussions further by:
To foster an open, secure, stable, accessible, peaceful, and interoperable 
cyberspace, Singapore will advance the development and implementation 
of cyber rules, norms, principles, and standards. We will also strengthen 
the global cybersecurity posture and contribute to international efforts 
to combat cross-border cyber threats and cybercrime.
CHAPTER  3
Enhance International Cyber Cooperation
Raising the global baseline level of cybersecurity
We want to support the global effort to raise the capacities 
of States to protect themselves against cyber threats. We 
also want to encourage the development and implementation 
of cybersecurity standards such that a minimum level of 
cybersecurity exists in the ICT products and services we use. 
Advocating a rules-based multilateral order in 
cyberspace and an interoperable ICT environment
As a small State, Singapore firmly supports the establishment of a 
rules-based multilateral order. Developing and implementing voluntary 
and non-binding norms are important steps toward this objective.  
We must help develop and abide by rules that all States agree to 
follow, which in turn guide responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. 
WHAT’S NEW?

35
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
36
Advance the development 
and implementation of 
voluntary, non-binding 
norms, which sit alongside 
international law
The United Nations (UN) is an important platform 
that offers all countries an opportunity to engage 
in and develop rules, norms, principles, and 
standards. Singapore has participated actively 
in international discussions at the UN, such as 
the UN Group of Governmental Experts. At these 
platforms, Singapore has affirmed that international 
law, in particular the Charter of the UN, applies 
to cyberspace, and underscored the centrality 
of States’ adherence to the cyber normative and 
stability framework. Going forward, Singapore 
will actively seek to contribute and move these 
discussions forward. For example, Singapore will be 
chairing the Open-Ended Working Group on Security 
of and in the Use of ICTs (2021–2025). 
In 2018, ASEAN became the first regional 
organisation to subscribe in-principle 
to the 11 voluntary, non-binding norms 
of responsible State behaviour in 
cyberspace. As part of ASEAN’s next 
steps, Singapore is working with partners 
such as the UN Office of Disarmament 
Affairs (UNODA) and Malaysia to develop 
a regional action plan to implement these 
norms. Under the UN-Singapore Cyber 
Programme, we will also work with our 
ASEAN and global partners to develop a 
Norms Implementation Checklist – akin to 
a set of actions that countries could take 
to implement these norms. 
Advance international cyber norms 
discussions and the understanding 
of the application of international 
law in cyberspace
Work with partners to 
implement cyber norms
Strategy 2021 seeks to build on the progress made by the international community. 
We will advance the development of cyber norms and affirm the applicability of 
international law in cyberspace. We will also work with partners to implement 
these cyber norms. 
Recognising the need to forge deeper public-private partnerships, 
Singapore has facilitated multi-stakeholder dialogues on cybersecurity 
through hosting the annual Singapore International Cyber Week (SICW) 
since 2016. SICW brings together international and regional policy makers, 
industry partners, and academia to discuss cross-cutting cybersecurity 
issues. Singapore also hosts the ASEAN Ministerial Conference on 
Cybersecurity (AMCC), chaired by Singapore’s Minister-in-charge of 
Cybersecurity, on the side lines of SICW. The AMCC serves as a non-
formal platform that brings together the ASEAN Secretary General and 
ASEAN Ministers of Telecommunications and/or Cybersecurity to discuss 
cybersecurity issues affecting our region and beyond. 
The 5th ASEAN Ministerial Conference on Cybersecurity (AMCC) in 2020
Singapore International Cyber Week and the 
ASEAN Ministerial Conference on Cybersecurity
UN CHARTER
Singapore International Cyber Week’s 
Official Webpage
CHAPTER  3
Enhance International Cyber Cooperation

37
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
38
Strengthen the global cybersecurity posture 
through capacity-building initiatives and the 
development of technical and interoperable 
cybersecurity standards
In the hyper-connected cyberspace, we 
are only as strong as our weakest link. As 
global discussions on cybersecurity expand 
beyond traditional cybersecurity topics 
into emerging technologies and digital 
security, there is a need for capacity building 
to support nations in responding to the 
changing cyber threat landscape. Singapore 
will work closely with our ASEAN Dialogue 
Partners, industry and academic partners. 
Support capacity building for a 
secure and stable cyberspace
Singapore recognises that standards and 
certifications are important tools to help raise 
the cybersecurity baseline of products and 
services in the market. Singapore is committed 
to the development and adoption of technical 
and interoperable cybersecurity standards 
internationally. We will build on existing efforts 
such as the Common Criteria, an international 
standard that allows for mutual recognition of 
secure IT products. Singapore is also working 
towards the mutual recognition of local 
schemes like CSA’s Cybersecurity Labelling 
Scheme to improve the security of consumer 
IoT products globally. 
Promote the development and 
adoption of objective technical 
cybersecurity standards 
Apart from the development and implementation of cyber norms, it is important that 
States work together to raise the global baseline level of cybersecurity. To this end, 
Singapore will support capacity-building initiatives and promote the development  
of technical and interoperable cybersecurity standards for products and services.
The ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity 
Centre of Excellence (ASCCE) was 
launched in 2019 as part of the ASEAN 
Cyber Capacity Programme to support 
a coordinated build-up of cyber policy, 
operational, and technical capacities 
amongst senior ASEAN officials. The 
campus officially opened in October 2021.
With a funding commitment of S$30 
million, the ASCCE engages top 
cybersecurity experts and trainers 
to design and deliver cybersecurity 
capacity-building programmes, in 
collaboration with ASEAN Member 
States (AMS), ASEAN Dialogue Partners, 
international partners, and the UNODA.
The ASCCE has three principal functions. 
First, it conducts research and provides 
training on cybersecurity strategy, 
legislation, and implementation of 
international cyber norms. Second, the 
ASCCE provides training for Computer 
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs), 
focusing on technical skills and 
information sharing. Third, in partnership 
with Temasek Polytechnic, ASCCE 
provides participants with hands-on 
practicals through virtual cyber defence 
training and exercises.
While the COVID-19 pandemic halted in-
person capacity-building initiatives, the 
ASCCE has adapted our programmes 
ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence 
for delivery on digital platforms. In 
2020, the ASCCE trained over 300 AMS 
officials through seven virtual capacity-
building programmes. 
Looking ahead, the ASCCE will continue 
to be responsive to the region’s capacity 
building needs, providing programming in 
line with the changing digital landscape 
to equip officials with the capacities to 
strengthen cybersecurity in ASEAN  
and beyond. 
The ASCCE campus
CHAPTER  3
Enhance International Cyber Cooperation

39
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
40
Contribute to international efforts to combat 
cross-border cyber threats
Even as we work towards a rules-based multilateral order in cyberspace and 
raise the global baseline level of cybersecurity, cyberattacks will inevitably 
happen from time to time. Examples such as the 2021 Microsoft Exchange Server 
breach demonstrate that cyber threats are not confined within geographical 
boundaries. Bilateral and multilateral operational cooperation are thus key  
to share timely information and respond to these incidents swiftly. 
Building on existing partnerships and 
bilateral agreements, Singapore will 
enhance our engagements with key 
international partners through regular 
dialogues to facilitate the sharing of 
operational and technical information. 
Beyond operational cooperation, 
Singapore is also looking to exchange 
best practices in cyber policy, ecosystem, 
and workforce development with our 
counterparts, and coordinate our 
capacity-building efforts to strengthen 
global cybersecurity.
Maintain robust bilateral 
cybersecurity ties with 
key countries 
Singapore will strengthen multilateral 
cooperation with our regional and international 
partners. Today, Singapore participates 
actively in various international CERT networks 
and work closely with CERT counterparts 
to investigate cyber incidents and mitigate 
cyber threats. We also work closely with 
INTERPOL as well as private sector partners to 
combat cross-border cybercrime. Regionally, 
Singapore conducts the annual ASEAN Cyber 
Incident Drill (ACID) and is part of the ASEAN 
Information Exchange Mechanism. Singapore 
will build on these efforts and work more 
closely with our partners to collectively combat 
cross-border cyber threats. 
Strengthen multilateral 
cooperation to tackle  
cross-border cyber challenges
ASEAN CERT and ASEAN Information  
Exchange Mechanism 
The ASEAN CERT will be a mechanism 
to tighten coordination and enhance 
collaboration as listed in the ASEAN 
Cybersecurity Cooperation Strategy 
2017–2020. With Singapore as the 
lead, ASEAN is currently studying the 
implementation of the ASEAN CERT. 
In addition, the first ASEAN Digital 
Ministers’ Meeting in January 2021 
approved the establishment of an 
ASEAN CERT Information Exchange 
Mechanism. This initiative will 
further support the ASEAN CERT-
CERT cooperation to bolster the 
effectiveness of regional incident 
response capabilities. It will also 
facilitate future exchanges amongst 
all CERTs in ASEAN and coordinate 
CERT capacity-building programmes 
in the region through the ASCCE. 
CHAPTER  3
Enhance International Cyber Cooperation

41
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
42
A vibrant cybersecurity ecosystem lays the 
foundation for protecting Singapore from cyber 
threats in the longer term. It also strengthens 
Singapore’s position as a trusted global business 
hub and provides economic opportunities for 
Singaporeans and Singapore-based companies.
For Singapore to be a global leader in cybersecurity, the Government, 
industry, and academia will have to work closely together. We hope 
to grow and nurture an ecosystem of cybersecurity companies, 
innovators, and researchers, who can build and develop advanced 
cybersecurity capabilities and best-in-class products and services 
of high economic value.
DEVELOP A VIBRANT 
CYBERSECURITY 
ECOSYSTEM
Build a cybersecurity ecosystem 
underpinned by research and 
innovation for our security and 
economic needs
CHAPTER 4
GOAL

43
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
44
Strategy 2016 was successful in laying the foundations for a local cybersecurity 
ecosystem of companies. We have catalysed the development of several Made-in-
Singapore solutions and supported individuals and start-ups in establishing and 
scaling up their businesses. 
In Strategy 2021, we will take further steps to:
The cybersecurity industry and academia are key stakeholders in this national 
effort. The Government will work closely with them to develop advanced 
capabilities, encourage industry innovation to build world-class products  
and services, and support the growth of the cybersecurity market. 
Position Singapore as a trusted 
tech hub
We want to establish ourselves as an internationally 
recognised and trusted Testing, Inspection, and 
Certification (TIC) hub. Having strong security 
evaluation and testing capabilities will help bolster 
the SG Digital Economy brand.
Leverage research and innovation 
as a competitive advantage
We want to be at the forefront of cybersecurity 
research and development (R&D) to keep 
pace with the rapidly evolving technological 
landscape and leverage new technologies to 
stay ahead of malicious cyber actors.
Develop advanced 
capabilities for 
economic growth 
and national security
The Government will continue to work 
with researchers and end-users to shape 
the direction of cybersecurity R&D, such 
that research conducted can be directly 
applied to solve real-world challenges. We 
will also be working closely with industry to 
translate research findings into commercial 
products to meet our security and economic 
objectives. We will seek to include end-
users early in the R&D process, and grow 
the number of collaborations between 
academia and the cybersecurity industry 
to create more pathways for research 
translation. The National Cybersecurity R&D 
Programme (NCRP) will be a key vehicle for 
the implementation of these policies. 
To ensure the availability of cutting-edge capabilities amidst rapid technology 
change, the Government will actively facilitate the translation of research findings 
into commercial products, while supporting the development of our local R&D 
ecosystem. We will also invest in and build deep cybersecurity capabilities for our 
national security needs, both within Government and with industry partners.
Translate research into 
innovative and economically 
viable products
To support our national cybersecurity needs, 
the Government will be investing more in 
the development of deep cybersecurity 
capabilities. The Government also 
recognises that such investment can benefit 
the local cybersecurity industry’s capability 
development. The Government will therefore 
catalyse deep capability build-up in the local 
cybersecurity industry, especially in areas 
that are of strategic value to Singapore’s 
cyber defence, by working with selected 
industry partners. This is augmented by 
ongoing efforts to attract top international 
companies with deep cybersecurity 
capabilities to set up engineering or R&D 
facilities in Singapore.
Build up deep cybersecurity 
capabilities in Institutes of 
Higher Learning, the Government, 
and industry partners
CHAPTER  4
Develop a Vibrant Cybersecurity Ecosystem
WHAT’S NEW?

45
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
46
We hope to foster innovation that pushes the boundaries of cybersecurity products 
and services. We will achieve this by supporting industry innovation with targeted 
government initiatives. We will also support the growth of cyber entrepreneurs and 
start-ups in Singapore. Looking beyond our shores, we aspire for our enterprises  
to develop cybersecurity products that are recognised internationally.
Apart from supporting established 
cybersecurity firms, it is also important to 
encourage budding cyber entrepreneurs 
and start-ups. The Innovation Cybersecurity 
Ecosystem at Block 71 (ICE71) is one such 
initiative. ICE71 programmes provide support 
for innovators and startups at all growth 
stages. This includes community outreach 
and entrepreneurship programmes to engage 
the cybersecurity ecosystem community and 
promote collaboration between stakeholders. 
We will build on our programmes to encourage 
entrepreneurship, including developing the 
next phase of ICE71. 
Support growth of  
cyber start-ups 
To enhance the recognition of local 
security products in the global 
marketplace, we need to ensure that 
these products meet the relevant 
international standards. Singapore has 
implemented the Singapore Common 
Criteria Scheme which evaluates 
and certifies IT products against 
the international Common Criteria 
standard. We have also established the 
Cybersecurity Labelling Scheme for 
consumer smart devices. We will expand 
these schemes and make it easier for 
companies to submit their products for 
security evaluation and testing. Building 
on these achievements, we seek to 
develop a thriving local TIC ecosystem 
that is internationally recognised.
Develop cybersecurity 
products that are 
recognised internationally
The National Integrated Centre for Evaluation 
(NICE) is a one-stop facility for security 
evaluation and testing of products. It will also be 
a platform for the local community to develop 
their skills in this domain. 
NICE seeks to achieve the following objectives:
•	
To seed a community of practice for 
product evaluation and certification in 
Singapore, NICE will improve access to 
advanced equipment required for security 
evaluation at the highest assurance level.  
•	
To support the growth of the local 
cybersecurity TIC industry, NICE will 
provide opportunities for cybersecurity 
practitioners to research and train on 
advanced security evaluation techniques. 
•	
To build up local product evaluation 
expertise, NICE will support training 
courses and internships for students 
and professionals to learn more about 
security evaluation methodologies and 
certification processes. 
National Integrated 
Centre for Evaluation
CHAPTER  4
Develop a Vibrant Cybersecurity Ecosystem
CSA’s Cybersecurity 
Certification Guide
Given the rapidly evolving cyber threat 
landscape, cybersecurity firms need to 
constantly innovate and invest in new 
solutions to stay ahead of the curve. The 
Government will strengthen support for 
industry-led innovation in cybersecurity. 
For example, the Cybersecurity Industry 
Call for Innovation encourages companies 
to innovate and address pressing 
cybersecurity challenges by matching 
them with key local users, such as CII 
owners, who may have specific operational 
needs. This initiative also helps provide 
opportunities for local companies to tap 
into Singapore’s growing cybersecurity 
market and drive demand in our local 
cybersecurity industry. 
Support industry innovation
Innovate to build world-class 
products and services 

47
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
48
Grow our cybersecurity market
We seek to grow the market for Made-in-Singapore cybersecurity products 
and services. We will do so by supporting user adoption to drive demand for 
cybersecurity solutions. We will also encourage Singapore-based companies to 
internationalise and export their products and services.
Supporting user adoption helps build 
a steady demand for cybersecurity 
solutions. The Government will encourage 
user adoption by making cybersecurity 
solutions more accessible. Today, SMEs 
are already eligible for subsidised pre-
approved cybersecurity solutions under 
the SMEs Go Digital programme. For larger 
enterprises and organisations with specific 
cybersecurity needs, the Government will 
play a facilitative role to match supply with 
demand for more sophisticated solutions, 
given that end-users may not always be 
familiar with the wide range of cybersecurity 
solutions in the market. 
Encourage adoption of 
cybersecurity solutions 
Local companies should not limit themselves 
to the Singapore market and look to expand 
into new markets to capture the growing 
global and regional demand for cybersecurity 
products and services. The Government 
is looking to support promising local 
cybersecurity companies to expand overseas 
and export Made-in-Singapore solutions. 
For instance, the Government will curate, 
organise, and support these cyber companies 
in profiling their solutions internationally. 
Internationalise our 
cybersecurity companies
CHAPTER  4
Develop a Vibrant Cybersecurity Ecosystem

49
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
50
The successful execution of our 
cybersecurity strategy ultimately hinges 
on our people and talent. 
The breadth and depth of cybersecurity responsibilities 
for the Government, enterprises, and organisations will 
continue to grow. Amidst an ever-evolving technological 
landscape, we will need to groom new talent and upskill 
existing professionals to achieve the objectives discussed 
in the earlier chapters. 
It is therefore critical for Singapore to strengthen 
the cybersecurity talent pipeline. We can do so by 
leveraging our strong education system to grow a skilled 
cybersecurity workforce. This will enhance Singapore’s 
competitive advantage, especially amidst a global 
shortage of cybersecurity professionals. 
SKILLS
SKILLS
GROW A ROBUST 
CYBER TALENT 
PIPELINE
Develop and sustain a strong 
cybersecurity workforce to meet 
our security and economic needs
CHAPTER 5
GOAL

CHAPTER  5
Grow a Robust Cyber Talent Pipeline
51
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
52
Strategy 2016 had sought to ensure an adequate and well-trained cybersecurity 
workforce in light of growing demand for cybersecurity manpower. We have made 
good progress. Based on the 2020 Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA) 
Survey on Infocomm Media Manpower, there were more than 10,700 cybersecurity 
professionals in Singapore in 2020, up from around 6,000 cybersecurity 
professionals in 2018.
In Strategy 2021, we will take further steps to: 
Industry partners, IHLs, and professional associations are key partners to achieve 
these goals. Building on Singapore’s strong education system, the Government will 
work with all stakeholders to support youths, women, and mid-career professionals 
to pursue a cybersecurity career. To ensure that our cybersecurity workforce is well 
equipped with the requisite skills and knowledge, we will create an upskilling culture 
and foster a dynamic sector with strong professional communities.
010001111001001
01001000010101
001010111000101
00101000010100
JOIN OUR CAUSE IN 
PROTECTING SINGAPORE
WHAT’S NEW?
Move upstream to engage talent
We want to reach out to the young to develop their 
interest and cyber skills, and encourage more youths to 
pursue a career in cybersecurity. 
Strengthen our cyber workforce
We want to make sure that cybersecurity professionals 
have access to training resources and opportunities to 
keep pace with the ever-evolving cyber threat landscape. 

CHAPTER  5
Grow a Robust Cyber Talent Pipeline
53
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
54
Support youths, 
women, and mid-career 
professionals to pursue 
a cybersecurity career 
We seek to attract promising youths to the 
cybersecurity industry to build a pipeline of local 
talents for the longer-term. The Government will 
work closely with schools and other partners to 
engage youths through cybersecurity bootcamps, 
competitions, learning journeys, and career 
mentoring. In addition, the Government will equip 
school teachers and career counsellors with 
knowledge of the cybersecurity sector to guide 
students in their career choices under the SG 
Cyber Educators initiative. Selected male youth 
with aptitude and interest for cybersecurity can 
also serve their National Service under the Cyber 
Work-Learn scheme. This will further enhance the 
talent pipeline with continued skills development 
and hands-on experience.
Interest and enable youths 
to pursue cyber as a career 
The growth of a capable and competent workforce 
is sustained by attractive career prospects and 
a respected professional status. We will build 
on existing initiatives to attract more talented 
individuals to the cybersecurity profession.  
We will also nurture young Singaporeans’ interest 
in cybersecurity and engage under-represented 
groups in the cybersecurity profession. 
SG Cyber Youth is a national 
programme that guides youths in their 
cybersecurity journey, with support 
from the academia, community, 
and industry. A key initiative is the 
Youth Cyber Exploration Programme 
that introduces pre-tertiary 
students to the fundamentals of 
cybersecurity and cultivates their 
interest in a cybersecurity career. 
The Cybersecurity Career Mentoring 
Programme (CCMP) also provides 
career guidance and support from 
industry mentors. Other initiatives 
include the Student Volunteer & 
Recognition Programme (SVRP) and 
Cybersecurity Learning Journeys. 
Through the various programmes, we 
will identify a pool of local youths with 
exceptional cybersecurity talent, who 
will be groomed under the SG Cyber 
Olympians programme through cyber 
sparring sessions, deeper training, 
and international competitions.
SG Cyber Youth 
Apart from youths, the Government 
is also looking to attract 
more women and mid-career 
professionals from adjacent fields to 
join the cybersecurity industry. We 
will work closely with industry and 
international partners to encourage 
girls to take up cybersecurity 
education programmes and inspire 
women to take on cybersecurity 
roles. We will also encourage 
mid-career professionals to 
join the cybersecurity sector 
by leveraging professional 
conversion programmes such as 
the Cyber Security Associates and 
Technologists programme. 
Attract diverse talent 
Women remain under-represented in the 
cybersecurity profession. In partnership 
with industry and the local cybersecurity 
community, CSA launched SG Cyber Women, a 
targeted initiative to encourage more women to 
pursue a career in cybersecurity. 
Past programmes that have been organised as 
part of SG Cyber Women include the Capture-
The-Flag for Girls competition, Ladies in 
Cyber mentorship programme and technical 
workshops. In 2020, CSA also launched the SG 
Cyber Women X Series, a series of virtual events 
in celebration of International Women in Cyber 
Day. Women of all ages can participate in these 
events to find out more about cybersecurity or 
deepen their skills to further their career. 
Women in Cyber event at SICW 2020
SG Cyber Women 
Join the mailing list: 
SG Cyber Youth
SG Cyber Women

CHAPTER  5
Grow a Robust Cyber Talent Pipeline
55
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
56
The Government will facilitate and guide our 
professionals by developing good career pathways 
and skills training frameworks. For example, the 
Government launched the Skills Framework for ICT 
and the OT Cybersecurity Competency Framework, 
which are tools that enterprises can leverage 
to enhance career pathways for cybersecurity 
professionals in their organisation. We will also 
improve access to training and networking 
opportunities for cybersecurity professionals. Today, 
professionals can already tap on training grants to 
upgrade their skills or join programmes such as the 
SG Cyber Leaders programme to network with current 
and future cybersecurity leaders.
Enhance career pathways 
and facilitate development 
of deep skills
The Government will develop good career 
pathways for cybersecurity professionals 
in the public sector. For example, CSA 
developed the Cyber Security Development 
Programme to train a common pool of 
cybersecurity experts for the public sector. 
Upon completion of the Programme, 
participants can choose to pursue a career 
within the public service or enter the private 
sector. CSA also set up the CSA Academy, 
which provides cybersecurity professionals 
in the Government and CII sectors with 
niche courses not readily available in the 
training market. 
Raise, train, and sustain 
cybersecurity professionals 
in the public sector
A highly-skilled workforce is crucial to grow the cybersecurity industry, which will be a 
key sector in Singapore’s economy and digital future. Apart from attracting new talent 
to the profession, the Government will partner the industry and IHLs to enhance career 
pathways and facilitate the development of deep skills. The Government will also raise, 
train, and sustain cybersecurity professionals in the public sector.
Foster a dynamic sector with  
strong professional communities
The cybersecurity industry, 
professional bodies, and academia 
are key stakeholders in Singapore’s 
journey to grow a strong cyber 
workforce. Our industry and community 
partners often organise community 
events, workshops, conferences, and 
programmes that help strengthen 
the talent pipeline and develop 
our professionals. The Government 
will support and recognise these 
community efforts. For example, CSA 
supports the Cybersecurity Awards, 
an annual event that recognises 
enterprises and individuals who have 
made significant contributions to 
the local cybersecurity ecosystem. 
Moving forward, the Government will 
strengthen engagement with other 
professional bodies such as those for 
engineers and software developers, 
to encourage them to build secure-by-
design products and services.
Support our cybersecurity 
community and recognise 
excellence
We have observed a marked improvement in 
the standing of cybersecurity professionals 
and the emergence of a strong common 
identity. To build stronger communities of 
practice and foster trust within the profession, 
the Government will work closely with 
industry associations to further recognise 
the achievements and contributions of our 
cybersecurity community. 
Receiving Cybersecurity Awards
Marina Bay Sands
TRAINING
Create an upskilling culture for a globally 
competitive workforce

57
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
58
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021 serves as 
a blueprint for Singapore and Singaporeans to secure 
our Smart Nation, amidst an ever-evolving cyber 
threat landscape and emerging digital technologies. 
Cybersecurity is our collective responsibility. With 
everyone doing their part, we can create an open, 
secure, stable, accessible, peaceful, and interoperable 
digital environment, and reap the opportunities that 
digitalisation has to offer. 
CONCLUSION

59
The Singapore Cybersecurity Strategy 2021
60
TERM
DEFINITION	
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Refers to the study and use of intelligent machines to mimic human 
action and thought. 
Attack Surface
Refers to all vulnerable resources of a system, or the sum of the points 
through which an attacker could try to enter an environment.
Cloud
A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, and on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g. 
networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be 
rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction. 
Critical Information 
Infrastructure (CII)
The computer or computer system necessary for the continuous delivery 
of an essential service, which the loss or compromise thereof will have a 
debilitating effect on the availability of essential services in Singapore.
Cybercrime
Criminal acts related to the use of computers such as gaining unauthorised 
access to a computer to view, modify or destroy its data. 
Cyberspace
The complex environment resulting from the interaction of people, 
software and services on the Internet by means of technological devices 
and networks connected to it, which does not exist in any physical form.
Singapore’s cyberspace includes domain names with “.SG” or Singapore-
mentions, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses used in Singapore, and 
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) located here.
Domain Name System 
(DNS)
Refers to the system used to translate readable domain names to IP 
addresses. 
Edge Computing
Refers to the practice of capturing, processing, and analysing data near 
the source of data. 
Internet of Things (IoT)
The vast network of everyday objects, such as baby monitors, 
printers, televisions, and autonomous vehicles, that are connected 
to the Internet.
Operational Technology (OT)
Programmable systems or devices that interact with the physical 
environment or manage devices that interact with the physical 
environment. Examples include industrial control systems and building 
management systems.
Penetration Testing
An authorised simulated attack on a system to evaluate the efficacy of 
the security measures in place.
Quantum Technologies
A class of technologies that works by using the principles of quantum 
mechanics (the physics of sub-atomic particles). Examples of quantum 
technologies include quantum computing and cryptography. 
Ransomware
Malware that encrypts files on a victim’s device, rendering them 
unusable until a ransom is paid, usually in the form of Bitcoin or other 
cryptocurrencies. It may spread through phishing e-mails that contain 
malicious attachments or links, or malicious pop-ups that appear when 
users access unsafe websites.
Secure-by-Design
An approach to software and hardware development that seeks to 
minimise system vulnerabilities and reduce the attack surface, by 
designing and building in security at every development phase.
Vulnerability
A weakness in an information system, system security procedures, 
internal controls or implementation that could be exploited or triggered 
by a threat source. 
Zero-Trust
A security framework requiring all end-users, whether in or outside the
organisation’s network, to be authenticated, authorised, and 
continuously validated for security configuration and posture before 
being granted or keeping access to applications and data.
GLOSSARY

Contact Details
Cyber Security Agency of Singapore
GoSafeOnline
SingCERT
ScamAlert
www.csa.gov.sg
www.csa.gov.sg/gosafeonline
contact@csa.gov.sg
Website:
Website:
General enquiries/feedback:
www.csa.gov.sg/singcert/reporting
Website:
1800 722 6688
www.scamalert.sg
Contact anti-scam helpline:
Visit ScamAlert website:
If you have any feedback on this publication, or wish to find out more about 
Singapore’s efforts in cybersecurity, please visit the following websites or contact us:
If you wish to report a cybersecurity 
incident, please contact:
If you wish to seek scam-related advice:


