h
1] o, REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
POLICY AND STRATEGY

FEBRUARY 2021



NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY POLICY
AND STRATEGY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
FEBRUARY 2021



FOREWORD

At the start of the second term of my administration in 2019, we laid out
clear national objectives and affirmed our commitment to address some of
the most critical issues facing the country. To this end, we set our focus
and priority on tackling insecurity, strengthening our economy and
fighting corruption, as the pathway for progressive and sustainable
national development. An integral part of our approach to confronting
these issues has been to hinge on the opportunities offered by the current
technological and digital revolution. This approach stems from the
recognition that our country is blessed with a large, young and
entrepreneurial population, which offers us the unique opportunity to fully
exploit the benefits of Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
and the current digital environment. Our course of action is also premised
on our understanding that the digital environment is central and
indispensable to our national and economic security. Based on this, over
the last couple of years, we focused our efforts on several ICT-driven
initiatives to propel the country towards the attainment of our national
objectives.

In March 2020, we launched the National Broadband Plan (NBP) 2020 -
2025 to increase Internet and broadband penetration across the country
as part of our Economic Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP). We also
released an Economic Sustainability Plan 2020 targeted at mitigating the
effects of a deep recession and ensuring social stability and addressing
long-standing economic vulnerabilities as envisaged in the ERGP.
Furthermore, we spearheaded the implementation of several ICT-driven
schemes such as the Treasury Single Account (TSA) and Bank Verification
Number (BVN) to enhance accountability and improve delivery of
commercial and financial services across the country. We also hinged on
ICT to drive the implementation of our National Identity Program, Data
Privacy and Protection Framework and several other national initiatives
designed to encourage and increase the conduct of transactions and
interactions as well as government functions over the Internet and cyber
domain. The series of platforms provided by the cyber domain also serve as
enabler for tackling some of the myriad of security challenges facing our
country. Specifically, the cyber domain creates the nexus for synchronising
the efforts of our security and law enforcement agencies towards curbing
crime, irregular migration, human trafficking and arms proliferation
amongst others, while improving road safety and border security as well as



enhancing ongoing anti-banditry, anti-militancy and counter-insurgency
operations. Furthermore, the cyber domain provides us with the platform
to enhance accountability and transparency thereby supporting our
unwavering resolve to combat corruption in the country.

Despite these notable achievements, our ability to effectively harness and
fully exploit the benefits of the cyber domain is threatened by several
inherent challenges. The recent expansive nature of the Internet has
increased the proliferation and diversification of the threats in cyberspace.
Similar to other countries, our cyberspace is faced with dangers posed by
criminals constantly striving to perpetuate various forms of cyber attacks
and crimes such as fraud, identity and intellectual property theft as well as
elections interference and destruction of our critical infrastructure. We are
also witnessing an increasing use of the Internet for propagation of
seditious messages, fake news and hate speech. Moreover, the cyber
domain now hosts an increasing pool of illicit actors including foreign and
domestic groups, state and non-state elements, as well as lone wolves. The
wide playing field offered by cyberspace has also attracted the attention of
terrorists and other subversive elements who constantly strive to exploit
cyberspace for indoctrination or propaganda and to undermine the
government and cause apprehension towards the people. The criticality of
the threats affecting our cyber domain has been further exacerbated by
recent developments on the global stage. The outbreak of COVID-19
pandemic resulted in massive migration of the populace to cyberspace. The
advent of 5G and emergence of other new technologies such as Artificial
Intelligence, blockchain technology, cloud computing and Internet of
Things have further widened the scope and threat landscape of our
cyberspace.

Nonetheless, these challenges are not insurmountable. Beyond these
multifaceted threats lie opportunities for us to mobilise as a nation, and
develop our human resources and capacity across government and our
private sector, to build a strong, resilient and secure national cyberspace.
Our approach to national cybersecurity is the development of a robust and
adaptive digital ecosystem based on mutual collaboration and synergy of
the triad of government, academia and industry, reinforced by strong
regional and international alliances. It is for this reason that our national
cybersecurity is conceptualised as an integral and indispensable pillar of
our national and economic security. We have already demonstrated our
resolve and commitment to fully articulate our efforts towards enhancing

ii



our national cybersecurity. Our Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc)
Act 2015 empowers us with the legal framework for addressing cybercrime
and enhancing our national cybersecurity. In 2014, we developed our
maiden National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy which set the direction
for coordination of our engagements in cyberspace over the past 6 years.
The cybersecurity programs, institutions and initiatives implemented over
these past 6 years have helped to establish us as a formidable global and
regional player in the digital domain.

Therefore, the rationale for review of the National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy 2014 is to continue on this path of progress and build on previous
achievements. The objective is also to realign our cybersecurity efforts to
effectively confront the dynamic and emergent nature of threats in our
cyberspace while hinging us closer to the attainment of our national
security objectives. However, our quest for attainment of national security
objectives goes beyond reaction to cyber threats. We must continue to
coordinate and effectively harness the cybersecurity efforts of our private
sector, academia, industry and civil society towards progressive national
development. We must also synergise to develop the necessary human and
technological capacity to harness the benefits of the digital space to
accelerate positive economic transformation. The global disposition of the
cyber domain also gives us the platform to renew our commitment to
regional and international cooperation. These aforementioned aspirations
are the basis for the development of this policy document.

The National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2021 signifies the renewal
of my promise and commitment to Nigeria's national security and economic
prosperity and it ensures that our National Cybersecurity Program is
prioritised among other national exigencies in my administration.

I therefore endorse the document as the overarching policy and strategy
framework for driving Nigeria's cybersecurity efforts towards the
attainment of our national objectives.

»
MUHAMMADU BUHARI
President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces
Federal Republic of Nigeria

1ii



PREFACE

Nigeria, like several other countries across the globe, is currently
witnessing a surge in digital transformation. Many activities are now
migrating to the Internet especially with the advent of the COVID-19
pandemic and the emergence of new technologies. Consequently, Nigeria's
cyberspace has become a centre stage for new business innovations,
government functions and social interactions. This trend has created an
opportunity for the country to realign its priorities and articulate efforts
towards the attainment of stipulated national objectives. The current
attributes of cyberspace also pave the requisite path for the adoption of
new technologies, dismantling of barriers to commerce, reinforcement of
economic posture and enhancement of seamless communication across
borders. The opportunities offered by the cyberspace revolution also create
a platform for the enhancement and effective synchronisation of the efforts
of our intelligence, security and defence community towards addressing
the myriads of security challenges confronting the country.

However, the increased dependence on cyberspace comes with risks that
have significant national security and economic implications. The dynamic
nature of cyber threats and the constantly evolving tactics of perpetrators
of cybercrime pose serious risks to business, commercial and financial
activities which are all now extensively reliant on cyberspace. These cyber
threats also constitute hazards to everyday users of cyberspace which cut
across government establishments, private sector and the general
populace. Furthermore, these threats have the potential to compromise
critical networks and systems leading to disruption of essential services. In
most cases, these disruptions are perpetrated by individuals or groups
using arrays of malicious activities and attacks motivated by financial
gains, anti-government or terrorist related activities thus challenging the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of data in the Nigerian cyberspace.

In a bid to address these multifaceted cyber threats and embolden the
country for efficient and progressive use of the cyber domain, the Federal
Government of Nigeria (FGN), through the Office of the National Security
Adviser (ONSA), undertook several proactive steps to draw the necessary
cybersecurity roadmap for Nigeria. In this light, the National Cybersecurity
Policy and Strategy 2014 was developed to provide direction for
mainstreaming Nigeria's National Cybersecurity Program and set the path
for effective coordination of the activities of all relevant stakeholders across

iv



government, academia and the private sector to handle the dynamism of
security threats in the cyber domain. The Cybercrimes (Prohibition,
Prevention, Etc) Act 2015 was also developed and signed into law as the
legal and regulatory framework for the implementation and governance of
national cybersecurity in the country. However, in view of the emergent
nature of cyber threats as well as the constantly evolving technological and
socio-economic imperatives that depend on the cyber domain, provisions
were made for the review of the national cybersecurity policy and strategy
every 5 years, in line with global best practices. The focus was also to
hinge on the significant progress in cybersecurity made by the country
between 2014 and 2021 while also realigning efforts with the objectives of
Nigeria's National Security Strategy 2019.

Against this backdrop, and on behalf of His Excellency, President
Muhammadu Buhari GCFR, ONSA convened a  multi-stakeholder
committee comprising representatives from all spheres of the Nigerian
cybersecurity ecosystem, to develop a comprehensive National
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2021 for the common good of the
country. The document is an all-inclusive policy and strategy framework
which  focuses on;  strengthening  cybersecurity governance and
coordination, fostering protection of critical national information
infrastructure, enhancing incident response, strengthening legal and
regulatory framework, developing cyber defence capability, promoting the
digital economy, improving assurance monitoring and fostering regional
and international cooperation. The document is the output of an equitable
collaborative effort which captures the shared responsibility for articulating
Nigeria's engagements in cyberspace. It will serve as a strategic roadmap
for all stakeholders in the country to come together and drive the
attainment of the national cybersecurity objectives. In furtherance of this,
the focus will move to the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation
of the proffered initiatives. To this end, ONSA will continue to coordinate
efforts of stakeholders and pave way for the use of the cyber domain to

foster the realisation of Nigeria's national objectives.
»
RADONe

vaa
BABAGAN. GUNO

Major General (Retired)
National Security Adviser to the President
Federal Republic of Nigeria



ACIS
ATCON
AU
CAC
CAM
CEMS
CERT
CIIMP

CIPR

CIPMA

CNI
CNIUPP

CPA
CSEAN
CSIRT
DSA
ECOWAS
ERGP
FGN
FMCDE
EMITI
FMoE
FMoF
FMoJ
FMST
FMWASD
ICT

IP

ISP
ISPAN
IXP
LEAs
MFA

ACRONYMS

Auto Cyber Indicator Sharing

Association of Telecommunications Companies of Nigeria
African Union

Cybercrime Advisory Council

Child Abuse Materials

Cyber Emergency Monitoring System

Computer Emergency Response Team

Critical Information Infrastructure Measurable

Program
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection and
Resilience

Critical Infrastructure Program for Modelling and
Analysis
Critical National Information Infrastructure

Critical National Information Infrastructure

Protection Plan

Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act

Cyber Security Experts Association of Nigeria

Computer Security Incident Response Team

Defence Space Administration

Economic Community of West African States

Economic Recovery and Growth Plan

Federal Government of Nigeria

Federal Ministry of Communications and Digital Economy
Federal Ministry of Industry Trade and Investment
Federal Ministry of Education

Federal Ministry of Finance

Federal Ministry of Justice

Federal Ministry of Science and Technology

Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development
Information and Communications Technology

Internet Protocol

Internet Service Provider

Internet Service Providers Association of Nigeria

Internet Exchange Point

Law Enforcement Agencies

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

vi



MOD
NACWC
NAN
NASS
NBC
NCAM
Ncc
NCcce
NCDP
NCF
NCPS
NCTI
NEMA
ngCERT
NGO
NIIA
NIMC
NIRA
NITDA
NITDEF
NNBP
NOA
NOTAP
NSA
NTWG
NVA
OCWAR-C

ONSA
OSGF
PoC
PPP
soc
TETFund
TISN
TSA
UAVs
UNGA
USPF

Ministry of Defence

Nigerian Army Cyber Warfare Command

News Agency of Nigeria

National Assembly

National Broadcasting Commission

National Cybersecurity Awareness Month

Nigerian Communications Commission

National Cybersecurity Coordination Centre
National Cyber Defence Plan

National Cybersecurity Fund

National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy

National Cybersecurity Training Institute

National Emergency Management Agency

Nigeria Computer Emergency Response Team
Non-Governmental Organisation

Nigerian Institute of International Affairs

National Identity Management Commission

Nigeria Internet Registration Association

National Information Technology Development Agency
National Information Technology Development Fund
Nigerian National Broadband Plan

National Orientation Agency

National Office for Technology Acquisition and Promotion
National Security Adviser

National Technical Working Group

National Vulnerability Assessment

Organised Crime: West African Response on
Cybersecurity and Fight against Cybercrime

Office of the National Security Adviser

Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation
Point of Contact

Public Private Partnership

Security Operations Centre

Tertiary Education Trust Fund

Trusted Information Sharing Network

Treasury Single Account

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles

United Nations General Assembly

Universal Service Provision Fund

vii



TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD..occcooocccnoccnonoccnnocnnnoncnonorcnonarnnn aran rr rn nar nononc nono n enn norennnaronorannnrrononcnnnnnrnnocnonocaronaneno i
PREFACE occcoocccnnoccnncoconoconnnorron oro r non r nro rro non r Ono r IR nn RIO nar nn Ir rn no rn nn nro non rrnnorrnnnoronnrrnnrroncnnnnnonos iv
ACRONYMAS eocconcucconocuconononcnonorcacconenacnnsnaconecnoc raro cononocrnorancnon ona rraronacnorarcnoroneconoranccononercnacane|os vi
VISION AND MISSION ..oocooocccnocononoccnonoccnocacononoconarnnnoncno nn rnn no rnnn na rononononarnononrnnncncnnncnonoananonanos xi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY cooccooocccncoccnnonnncncnonnoncnnrncnnnrnnno rn non rro nono nnnnr nn nrnnnorrnnnnrnnnrrrnnnrroncnannnoos xii
CHAPTER Jlenocccnncnnnnconnnnconncnononcncnoncnrnnnorrnn nono n nn cnn rrn non rn nn nr nro rnnnnoronnnnrnncrrnnnaranncnrnnnss ..2
OVERVIEW OF NIGERIA'S CYBERSECURITY ENVIRONMENT ... ..2

1.1 GLOBAL CONTEX To ooccccccnononoccnnnnnnonononancnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnnnnnnnnnnnnncrnnnnnnnnnninranes 2

1.2 NIGERIA'S CYBERSECURITY LANDSCAPE cooooooccccccnnncnnnnocccccnnnnnononnnconnnnonnnnecononos 3

1.3 NIGERIA'S CYBER THREAT PROFILE ..occccccnnnnnnocccccnnnnnnnnnncnncnonononnnnncncnncnnnnnnininccs 3

1.4 WEAKNESSES AND VULNERABILITIES ...oooocccccccccconnnoccccncnnnnnonanccnncnononnnnnccnnnnnnnos 6

1.5 OUR STRENGTÉES oocccccccnnnnnoocncncnnnnnnnnnnnncnnnnnonnnnnoncrnnnnnnnnnnnrrrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnnneronnnos 7
CHAPTER DZoocccccncncnncoconocononocnnnconnnnonrnn rro non nono rr rn nn rro nor nn rn rn nono ner nono nrnnnnrnnnnornnnnrrnnnrrancnanonoss 10
NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY POLICY DIRECTION ...oooccoconccononcnonnnonarononanecanacconanononanonananenano 10

2.1 NATIONAL PRIORITIES..

2.2 STRATEGIC AREAS OF FOCUS

2.3 RISK-BASED APPROACH TO NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY cocccccnnnoccccccnncnnnonincncs 2

2.4 NATIONAL SECURITY IMPERATIVES .ooccccccccnnnnoocccnnnnnononnncconcconanonnnonccnnnononnninonos 2

2.5 NATIONAL CYBERSPACE DOCTRINES ccccccccnnnnoocccncnnnnnonononcnanonnnonnnanncnnncnnnnnninons 3
CHAPTER DBeooccconcnnnncoconococonocnnnnnnnnnorrn corro non ron rr rn nrrr nn rr n nn rn nn nono nrnnonrnnnnrroncaronnnrrnncrnancnannnoos 16
STRENGTHENING CYBERSECURITY GOVERNANCE AND COORDINATION ..occoocccconccononononaro 16

3.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY COORDINATION CENTRE ..16

3.2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CYBERSECURITY STAKEHOLDERS ...
CHAPTER 4eooccconcccnncacconononononononanonanononarononannnnnnnnonnnononnnonanononanenanannnanannnanrnnnnnonanenonanenananenase 19
FOSTERING PROTECTION OF CRITICAL NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ....19

4.1 CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION AND RESILIENCE .20

4.2 CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE SECTORS oocccccccnnnnooocccccncnnnnaninonos 20

4.3 STRATEGIC INITIATIVES ..ooooccccccnnnnnnnoncncnnnnnnnnninnnccnnnnononnninnnncnnnnnnnnnnccnnnononeninincs 21

4.4 COORDINATION OF CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION23

4.5 CRITICAL NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION PLAN ...23
CHAPTER 5...

ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MANAGEMENT..cooocccocncococonocanocnoncnonanononanenananonano 26
5.1 COORDINATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MANAGEMENT....26
5.2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF NGCERT ccccooooccccccconononoconcnnnnnonnnoncccnncnnnnnnnnnccnnnanananenonos 27
5.3 ESTABLISHMENT OF SECTORAL AND OTHER CSIRTS ..0oocccccccnnnnnoncccccnnnnnnanininós 27
5.4 NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CRISIS RESPONSE PLAN ...ooccccccccnonoocccccnncnononinnnos 28

viii



5.5 INITIATIVES FOR MANAGING CYBERSECURITY INCIDENTS ccocoooccccccccnonnnooconnns 28
5.6 MECHANISM FOR CYBER INCIDENT REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARING29

5.7 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT TO ENHANCE INCIDENT MANAGEMENT ..ccoonooccccccs 29

5.8 COLLABORATIVE PARTNERSHIP FOR INCIDENT MANAGEMENT ooocccccccnnnooccnnns 30
CHAPTER ÓOoooccccccnnnocononoconononononoconnrrnnnr nono rn nr rr nn rro nor ron nr rn nnrnn nono nnorrnnnrrnnnnrrnncrrnnnsnrnncarannnos 33
STRENGTHENING LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK ..ccoooncccccccnoncnononononanononaninananonas 33

6.1 AMENDMENT OF CYBERCRIME LEGISLATION ..cooooccccccccnnnononanccnnnconononinicannncnos 33

6.2 ENACTMENT AND HARMONISATION OF NEW AND EXISTING LEGISLATIONS..34

6.3 INTERNET SAFETY AND CHILD ONLINE PROTECTION ..oocccccnnnnnnnoccccnnnnonunininicós 35

6.4 GENDER RIGHTS ONLINE ...occcccccncnnonoccnnnonononononnccnnnonnnnnnonnncnnnnononanancnaconnnaninanens 37

6.5 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIARY ........... 38

6.6 NATIONAL DIGITAL FORENSICS LABORATORY cocccccccnonocccccncnnnonononcconancnnnnnoonnnos 38

6.7 MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMBATING CYBERCRIME .ooccccccccononoocccnns 39
CHAPTER Teocccncccncnoncnonorononarononaconananonarnnnonr nono rn nena nena na reno nr nnnnrnnnnnn roca nnno arenosa nonananonarenacacinanes 41
ENHANCING CYBER DEFENCE CAPABILITY c..oocccoocncnocononocnnnnocnnncaconornnncocnonoccnoncrnnnccrnnncacnnos 41

7.1 NATIONAL CYBER DEFENCE COORDINATION oocccccccnononoccnccnnnnnnononcccnnanonannoocnons 41

7.2 NATIONAL CYBER DEFENCE PLAN ..0oocccccnnnnnonioccccnnnononeninnncnnnnnonaninacccnnnnnunnniniocs 42

7.3 CYBER DEFENCE CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT cocccccccnnnnnnccnnncnnnnnnonanicnncnnnnnnninanens 42
CHAPTER B oooooccnnocnonocononcccnononcnnnoconorrrnnnrrrnr rn nor rn nr ro nn nc nono rr rro rro nn rn nncnrnnnrroncnrnnnrrnncnrnnncannnos 45
PROMOTING A THRIVING DIGITAL ECONOMY occcoocncnoncnonacononacocnnnnonannnnoncnoncnnnonarononaninananenas 45

8.1 SAFE AND TRUSTED ONLINE ENVIRONMENT. ..oocccccccncccnnnocccnnccnnnnnnnannncnnnnnnnnins 45

8.2 ROBUST CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE occoooccccccncncnnnonocccccnnnnnnnnnncccnnnnananacinenos 48

8.3 INDIGENOUS CYBERSECURITY TECHNOLOGY coccccccnnnonoccccnnnnnonononcncnnnnnnnnnonocons 50

8.4 RAISING AWARENESS .cooooooccccccncnonononcccnnnnnnnnnnonncnnnnnonnnnnnnncnnnnnnnnnnnncnnnnronnnnenicons 50

8.5 VIRTUAL ASSETS cccconoooccccccnnncnononanccncnnnnnnnnnonncnnnnonnnnnnnnnnnnnnnonnnnnnnnnnnnnnnoninicncnnnons 51
CHAPTER 9Qoonocccnnocnonocononocononocnnnncconorrnnnn crono cnn or r nn crono nr r ono rr rro nr nono rn noc rrnnnrrnnncrnnncrnnnsrnnncannnos 53
ASSURANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION cocoocncnoccnonocononononccoconnoncnoncnononnnononnnonanencnananonos 53

9.1 STANDARDS AND GOOD PRACTICES.... .53

9.2 QUALITY CONTROL AND SECURITY PROCESSES . 54
CHAPTER 10... .57
ENHANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION..... 2.57

10.1  COORDINATION FRAMEWORK FOR INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT .0coonooccccccs 57

10.2 REGIONAL CYBERSECURITY DEVELOPMENT ooccccccccnnnnoccccncnnnnnnnnonccnnnnononaninonnns 58

10.3. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION .ccooooccccccccnonoooncncnnnnnononononcnnnnnnnnnnnnncnnnnnnnnnnnenenons 58
CHAPTER ll occooonncncncncnocononanonocanocananonarcnncnrno nono nonanennnaronnnnnnarnnnnar no nano nonarenananonananenanenananinanes 61
FUNDING AND SUSTAINABILTT Y ....oooncccocccononcnonarononanenonanonarononarnnnnnnnonanononaronananonananonaranacaconos 61

11.1  FUNDING AND SUSTAINABILITY IMPERATIVES ..cccccononoccccnccnnnonononcconacononaniconons 61

11.2 MULTILATERAL FUNDING AND GRANTS .ocoocoooccccnnnccnnnnoccnnccnnnonononnccnnnnnnnnnnrrncnns 62



CHAPTER 12....
CONCLUSION ...

APPENDIX coocooccoconoconoconononcnononarnonrnoroncrnnrnonrna nena rnnn na rennr na rnnronrnnnrnonrnaronarnnrnanenaronarnnroncanacnanenns 1

IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ...ooocconoccccnoccnononononanonarononacnnnacnonnnnnonrno nana nonarenonanonananonarannonanonananonos 1-1
¡III 1-1
MONITORING AND EVALUATION cooocccccccnnnonooccccnnnnnnnnnncrnccnnnnonnnnnrrrnnnononnnnnnrcnnnnonananironnnns 1-1
ACTION PLAN FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION cccoconoccccnncncnnnnnnnncncnnnnnononinianaccnnnonnnnnnos 1-3

NATIONAL CYBERSCURITY POLICY AND STRATEGY 2021 SUMMARY ..oooncoooccoconcncanencncnnnno 2-1



VISION AND MISSION

VISION

A safe and secure digital community that provides opportunities for its
citizenry and promotes peaceful and proactive engagements in cyberspace
for enhanced national prosperity

MISSION

To foster a trusted cyber environment that optimises Nigeria's
cybersecurity readiness and coordination capacities towards addressing
the nation's cyber risk exposure

xi



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Technological advancements have resulted in a variety of breakthroughs, a
preponderance of which has been evident over the past decades by the
growth of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) and the
evolution of the Internet. These ICT and Internet-driven developments are
actualised in almost all facets of life and the ensuing transformations have
resulted in heavy dependence on the cyber domain. In Nigeria, the
evolution, growth and adoption of ICT and the Internet has been at an
accelerated pace since the turn of the 21st Century. The country has
predominantly embraced ICT and the Internet to drive new initiatives and
reach new milestones. A reflection of this is apparent in the high rate of
adoption of new technologies, the proliferation of foreign-based technology
conglomerates in the Nigerian market as well as the rising number of
indigenous technology firms across the country. These new dependencies
have transformed Nigeria's cyber domain to a potent game changer in the
affairs of peace, security and economic progression. Essentially, the
Nigerian economy, government functions and the provision of essential
services now rely on the integrity of cyberspace. This new digital era
presents significant opportunities to enhance Nigeria's readiness for global
economic competitiveness and repositioning for national development.

However, there are several downsides attributed to the widespread use of
the cyber domain. Some of these downsides, which are also reflected on
the global scale, have profound implications for the nation's security and
economic wellbeing. From the threats posed by cybercrime and cyber
terrorism, to the dangers emanating from cyber espionage and the use of
Internet social media for propagation of hate speech and seditious
messages, as well as the risks of breaches to sensitive personal and
government data, it is almost impossible to overstate the challenges. In the
light of these dynamic challenges and threats, it is crucial for the Nigerian
cyber ecosystem to undergo major periodic reforms to better position the
nation to effectively harness the benefits of the digital revolution.

Therefore, it is not coincidental that the Federal Government of Nigeria
(FGN) developed a national framework for cybersecurity following the
approach of several other countries and in line with the exigent national
priorities and realities of the country. This national framework, codified as
the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy, set the clear direction for
coordination of Nigeria's cybersecurity engagements in recognition of

xii



cyberspace as the fifth domain, and as part of efforts to protect the
national interests and sovereignty of the country. Furthermore, with due
cognisance of the dynamic nature of threats in cyberspace, provisions were
made for review and update of the National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy, every 5 years in line with global best practices.

Against this backdrop, the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy
2014 was reviewed based on a whole-of-government and multi-stakeholder
approach. This culminated in the development of the National
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2021 as a purposeful and living
document to facilitate the attainment of a secure and resilient Nigerian
cyberspace. The document is a confluence of ends, ways and means which
emplaces our National Cybersecurity Programme on 8 critical pillars,
namely:

+ Strengthening Cybersecurity Governance and Coordination

e Fostering Protection of Critical National Information Infrastructure
+ Enhancing Cybersecurity Incident Management

+ Strengthening Legal and Regulatory Framework

+ Enhancing Cyber Defence Capability

+ Promoting a Thriving Digital Economy

+ Assurance Monitoring and Evaluation

e Enhancing International Cooperation

To this end, we shall establish a national structure to enhance the
coordination and cohesion of all our cybersecurity activities and multi-
stakeholder efforts. We will also align our direction for ensuring the
security and resilience of our critical infrastructure, through collaborative
partnership and development of a robust protection plan. Furthermore, we
will strengthen our incident response capability through improved
information sharing, enhanced crisis management and comprehensive
technical training of incident response teams. Additionally, we will build
our cyber defence capability through extensive training programmes for
our military and other security agencies. Also, we will enhance our
capacity to tackle cybercrime by amending our existing legislation and
building the capacity of our law enforcement and judiciary. In the area of
the economy, we will promote a thriving digital environment by fostering a
trusted Internet, launching widespread awareness programmes and
engendering extensive development of our human resources. We will also
embrace indigenous technological innovations as well as research and

xiii



development to better empower us to tackle the new and emerging threats
in cyberspace. Considering that cybercrimes can occur across international
jurisdictions, government will exploit both regional and global collaborative
mechanisms to address the use of cyberspace for activities detrimental to
our national security. Our country will also continue the promotion of
regional and global cooperation in cybersecurity towards strengthening
international security, peace and prosperity.

xiv



Nigeria is one
of the leading
digitally connected
nations in the African -
region and indeed the -
rest of the world

y online
77, child
abuse

/

cybercrime

cyber-
terrorism

7 major cyber

threats are of
concern to Nigeria elections
online these include interference
gender
explotation
¿ other
pandemic-
p cyber
induced
threats
cyber
threats

Y

A significant
percentage of
Nigeria's over 193m
population are
active Internet
users

Outbreak
of COVID-19
pandemic, advent
of 5G technology
and Climate Change,
amongst others,
have a profound
impact on global
cybersecurity




CHAPTER 1

OVERVIEW OF NIGERIA'S CYBERSECURITY ENVIRONMENT

This overview provides substantial information on the current state of
cybersecurity in Nigeria. It reflects on the predominant cybersecurity
trends on the global stage as the prerequisite for underscoring the
current cybersecurity posture of the country. Thereafter, it gives a
highlight of Nigeria's current cybersecurity landscape and a summary
of the nation's cyber threat profile. This is followed by a brief
examination of the country's existing cybersecurity weaknesses and
strengths in a bid to identify gaps and spell out the rationale for the
institution of this National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2021.

1.1 GLOBAL CONTEXT

Over the last decade, the digital environment across the globe has
witnessed exponential growth and intensive adoption of information
and communication technologies (ICT). It is intuitive that active
Internet users now encompass a significant proportion of the global
population. This trend is driven by the rapid increase in the use of
mobile devices worldwide and the surge in the social media. The
current global digital revolution has birthed the emergence of new
technologies including artificial intelligence, cloud computing,
blockchain technology and Internet of Things, amongst others. As a
result of this digital revolution, cybersecurity is no longer viewed as a
mere technical issue. Rather, cybersecurity is now approached as a
multi-faceted global concern. This multivariate nature of cybersecurity
has informed the different yet convergent approaches by nations of the
world in dealing with cyber threats.

Other recent developments across the globe have impacted on
cybersecurity. The outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic informed a rise in
remote working and widespread adoption of online collaboration,
increase in cloud services and rise in electronic transactions, with
attendant increase in the potential impacts of cyber threats. The
challenges of global security posed by state and non-state actors also
have a significant impact on cybersecurity. The use of cyber
operations by actors to achieve strategic objectives or economic
influence is becoming more common and intense. Similarly, other

issues such as the advent of 5G technology and climate change may
2



have a profound impact on the global digital landscape. Cybersecurity
is therefore an extensive challenge, which requires enhanced
international cooperation to successfully attain an acceptable level of
confidence and trust at national and global levels.

1.2 NIGERIA'S CYBERSECURITY LANDSCAPE

Nigeria is at a centre stage in the current cyberspace revolution. In the
area of ICT, Nigeria is one of the leading digitally connected nations in
the African region and indeed the rest of the world. This is evident
from the widespread adoption of ICT across the country. The high
number of technology conglomerates and rising rate of indigenous ICT
firms in the Nigerian market also point to the current and future
potentials of the Nigerian cyberspace. With a population of over 193
million people, according to 2016 estimates by the Nigerian Population
Commission, a significant percentage of the Nigerian populace are
active Internet users.

In recognition of the potentials offered by the cyber domain, Nigeria
has launched several initiatives to capitalise on the available
opportunities. Nigeria's National Digital Economy Policy and Strategy
2020 - 2030 and the Economic Sustainability Plan (ESP) 2020 - 2030
envisage an economy driven by ICT. Nigeria also formulated the
National Broadband Plan 2020 - 2025 in line with the Economic
Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP) and the Presidential initiative to
boost broadband penetration across the country. Furthermore, the
Nigeria Data Protection Regulation 2019 was launched to provide
guidelines for electronic data exchange while the Data Protection Bill
2020 is soon expected to be signed into law to facilitate enhanced
security and privacy of personal data. The Nigerian private sector has
also hinged on the benefits offered by the cyber domain. Commercial
and business processes across Nigeria are now constantly migrating to
new forms of cyber based technologies. Ultimately, Nigeria fully
recognises the centrality and indispensability of the cyber domain to
the attainment of national security and socio-economic prosperity.

1.3 NIGERIA'S CYBER THREAT PROFILE

The Nigerian cyberspace is faced with significant threats which result
in huge financial losses corresponding to a substantial percentage of
the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Equally, a high number
of organisations in Nigeria fall victim of cyber attacks, making the

3



country a high target by perpetrators of cybercrime. Similarly, reports
from the Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC) suggest that
cyber attacks are one of the biggest threats to the country's
telecommunications sector. The scale and multiplicity of these threats
reinforce the need for us to adopt a whole-of-society approach to
cybersecurity.

In line with the current trends in the global digital environment, the
main targets of cyber attacks in the Nigerian cyberspace include
cloud-based systems, mobile devices, Internet of Things, data centres
and networks of corporate establishments, amongst others.
Organisations in the financial sector are expected to face the highest
cyber risks as reports from the Nigerian Interbank Settlement System
(NIBSS) suggest that mobile fraud cases could likely rise.
Furthermore, the expansion of cyber threats beyond computer
systems and networks to  cyber-physical systems such as
transportation technologies, air traffic control systems, smart devices
and hydropower grids, is another new reality that the country needs to
cope with. The current appetite for social media is also prompting new
methods of cyber attacks. In view of the foregoing, we have
identified 7 major cyber threats of concern, the details are as follows:

1.3.1 Cybercrime

The common forms of cybercrime that feature in the Nigerian cyber
domain include Phishing, Business Email Compromise (BEC),
ransomware and malwares as well as credentials theft, intellectual
property rights violation and online scam amongst others. Nigeria is
also mindful of emerging cyber threats such as Machine Learning
Poisoning, Deep Fakes, Cloud Hijacking, Artificial Intelligence Fuzzing
and Crypto Currency Hacking, amongst others. The expanding pool of
data in the Nigerian cyberspace is also indicative of a potential rise in
the number of targeted data breaches. Also, the wanton drive for high
value currencies by individual or organised cyber criminals has
resulted in a predominant rise in international fraud and scams with
attendant impact on the country's national image.

1.3.2 Cyber Terrorism and Terrorists Use of the Internet

The current thriving nature of the Nigerian cyberspace has drawn the
attention of domestic and transnational terrorist groups. There is now
an increasing likelihood for cyber terrorists to use cyberspace to inflict
violence through the targeting of critical assets including, financial

4



systems, military networks, transportation infrastructure,
telecommunications systems and government services, amongst
others. Terrorists and other organised illicit groups have also mastered
the use of cyberspace to enhance their operations or cause
apprehension through spreading of fake news and hate speech. In
addition, the use of social media by terrorists for recruitment and
propaganda is a featuring threat in the Nigerian cyberspace. The
typical overall objective of these wanton actors is to use cyberspace to
undermine the government and instil a sense of fear or siege on the
populace.

1.3.3 Online Child Abuse and Exploitation

Nigeria recognises the importance of the protection and safety of the
younger generation and their vulnerabilities in cyberspace. In this
light, the country stands against online child abuse and exploitation.
Activities classified under this unwholesome practice take place on the
Internet or through the use of information systems such as mobile
devices. Perpetrators of online abuse of children are also leveraging
social media and emerging cyberspace technologies to carry out
cyberbullying, online harassment and sexual molestation of children
and other vulnerable individuals amongst others.

1.3.4 Online Gender Exploitation

We recognise that abuse and gender violence takes place in
cyberspace. We are therefore committed to combating these illicit
activities. As Nigerians of all gender are getting increasingly connected
to the Internet and getting more involved in cyber related activities,
there is a rise in cases of gender violence, online sexual harassment,
cyber-stalking, Internet-induced kidnapping, rape, black mailing and
cyberbullying amongst others. Increasingly, several Nigerians
irrespective of gender across all spheres of society are falling victim to
predominant cyber threats such as online defamation, public shaming
and identity theft, amongst others. These unwholesome acts have the
potentials to result in psychological or mental health challenges for
victims.

1.3.5 Elections Interference

Elections are foundational to the liberal democracy entrenched in our
national endeavours to ensure the wellbeing and stability of the
nation. Hence, Nigeria must be prepared to contend with the major

5



threats of the use of cyberspace for perpetrating elections interference
or violence. As society incrementally embraces digitisation and as the
election process itself becomes more dependent on digital
technologies, domestic, external, state and non-state actors have the
potential to leverage cyberspace and interfere with the electoral
process. These threats could range from direct physical attack on
elections critical infrastructure or the conduct of cyber operations to
disrupt systems or influence the electorate.

1.3.6 Pandemic-Induced Cyber Threats

The COVID-19 pandemic forced organisations and people across
Nigeria to move their activities to cyberspace. The pandemic also
resulted in acute changes and innovations in governance and
business processes which are more likely to remain in the long-term.
Pandemic-induced migration into cyberspace has also changed the
nature of threats and increased the risks and potential impacts of
cyber attacks. Essentially, the attack playing field for cybercriminals
has now widened. There is now a rise in cases of email scam or
compromise of global and regional health palliative programmes
including several reports of cybercriminals masquerading as legitimate
agencies to perpetrate fraud and ilegalities. Data theft, cloud
compromise and teleconference hijacking are also major challenges
associated with the pandemic-era.

1.3.7 Other Cyber Threats

Nigeria is also conscious of the myriad of other predominant and
emerging security threats emanating from cyber space such as
fragmentation of technology, Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs),
cyber conflict, as well as cyber threats posed by climate change and
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) amongst others, which could be
perpetrated by nation states or non-state actors with the objective of
compromising our critical services and undermining our economy and
national security. These rapidly changing strategic cyber threats, by a
foreign actor or actors, could make our infrastructure susceptible to
eaves dropping, military or industrial espionage or other malicious
activities.

1.4 WEAKNESSES AND VULNERABILITIES

As a principle of risk management and resilience, it is crucial to

identify the major weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the Nigerian

cybersecurity ecosystem. The World Bank Digital Economy Diagnostic
6



Report 2019 noted that shortfalls in human resources capacity
development and accessibility to digital technologies are factors
limiting  cybersecurity development in Nigeria. Similarly, the
International Telecommunication Union Global Cybersecurity Index
2018, which surveyed the cybersecurity readiness of member states
based on legal, technical, organisational, cooperation and capacity
development, ranked Nigeria 57th position out of the 155 countries
surveyed across the globe. Moreover, Nigeria currently relies largely on
foreign ICT and cybersecurity solutions and technologies.

Human resource capacity, research and development, and awareness
on cybersecurity are still relatively low in Nigeria cutting across
government, private sector and society in general. This shortfall has
been responsible for diminished cybersecurity consciousness at the
organisational and individual levels. Consequently, the level of
attention and commitment of resources towards cybersecurity is
unable to keep pace with the requirements of current ICT and the
predominance of evolving cyber threats.

1.5 OUR STRENGTHS

Despite the current cyber threat profile, Nigeria has a strong
commitment to defend her citizens, safeguard operations of critical
infrastructure and ensure continuity of services. The Federal
Government of Nigeria is also conscious of the benefits of the cyber
domain and its potential for enhancing the country's economic
prosperity. Hence, there is concerted mobilisation of national multi-
stakeholder efforts to ensure that the opportunities are exploited and
the challenges are effectively mitigated. The programmes, initiatives
and frameworks spearheaded by Government, such as the National
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2014, the Cybercrimes (Prohibition,
Prevention, Etc) (CPA) Act 2015, the Nigerian Data Protection
Regulation 2019, National Broadband Plan 2020 - 2025 and National
Digital Economic Policy and Strategy 2020 - 2030, amongst several
others, have engendered significant improvements to cybersecurity in
Nigeria.

Nigeria is also blessed with a proactive and informed private sector
that is well placed to play a leading role in the regional and indeed
global cybersecurity solutions market. The year 2019 saw an increase
in uptake of cybersecurity monitoring capabilities to keep pace and
protect operations and infrastructure from cyber attacks. The

7



country's multi-stakeholder National Cybercrime Advisory Council
(CAC), has spearheaded several efforts to provide strategic direction for
cybersecurity in Nigeria. On the regional and international arena,
Nigeria collaborates with partners such as the ECOWAS Commission
and Organised Crime: West African Response on Cybersecurity and
Fight against Cybercrime (OCWAR-C), amongst others, to further
enhance cybersecurity. In 2018, the country in collaboration with
other international partners, conducted a Cybersecurity Capacity
Review for Nigeria.



national
for the Nigerian

Strengthening Fighting
Development

vrity is a critical
xr of economic
er! progression and development

pr domain A

S
Pos

Technology
is critical to the al
of Nigeria's national




CHAPTER 2

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY POLICY DIRECTION

This policy direction outlines Nigeria's national priorities, national
security imperatives and cyberspace doctrines which cumulatively
inform the country's cybersecurity policy initiatives and strategic
actions.

2.1 NATIONAL PRIORITIES

Our approach to cybersecurity is anchored on enduring national
values, interests and objectives which define who we are as a people
and our collective behaviour and commitment to the advancement of
nationhood. These factors also guide the formulation of our national
cybersecurity policy and strategy while strengthening our commitment
to the delivery of the promises of peace, security, freedom, democracy,
equality, justice, preservation of human rights, promotion of women
rights, safeguarding of individual liberties and respect for the rule of
law. Furthermore, our national cybersecurity objectives, policy
initiatives and strategic actions are formulated to retain and renew
Nigeria's commitment to the preservation of the nation's sovereignty,
territorial integrity, human security, prosperity and wellbeing of the
people. This approach to cybersecurity is also closely aligned with our
commitment to uphold regional and international peace, and security
cooperation while embracing the norms and conventions of
international law.

2.1.1 National Cybersecurity Policy Considerations

In 2019, the Federal Government of Nigeria outlined 3 cardinal and
existential national objectives for the Nigerian people. These include:
Protecting National Security; Strengthening Economic Development;
and Fighting Corruption. The National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy therefore supports these national objectives through 4
fundamental national cybersecurity policy considerations as follows:

e The security and wellbeing of the Nigerian people is as important
in the cyber domain as it is in the physical domain.

e Cybersecurity is a critical enabler of economic progression and
development.

10



e Technology development is critical to the attainment of Nigeria's
national priorities.

e Regional and international collaboration is central and crucial to
cybersecurity.

Therefore, we recognise that each of these policy considerations
requires a set of focused and coordinated strategic actions. This will
provide the necessary platform for sound planning and performance
tracking towards the execution of our national cybersecurity strategy,
thereby enabling all stakeholders to stay focused on delivering the
required collective mandate.

2.2 STRATEGIC AREAS OF FOCUS

The overall purpose of the national cybersecurity policy is to set a
unified agenda and new direction for our national cybersecurity
programme through prioritisation of national requirements. Our
strategic areas of focus are based on 8 pillars which form the support
for our national cybersecurity programme.

Strengthening Cybersecurity a S Enhuncing Cyber
Governance and Coordination ' Defence Capability

Fostering Protection of Critical PS 8 Pillars 19 Prometing a Thriving
Mational Information Infrastructure or to form the Wi cserr Digital Economy
Fo support lor our F

H national 'F
Enhancing Cyhersecurity MAA... A a Aseurance Manitaring
Fo an
Strengthening Legal and á y Enhaucing International
Regulatory Framework Cooperation

These pillars create the foundation for the delivery of our national
objectives and align the direction of all key stakeholders that have a
role to play in the enhancement of the progressive use of the Nigerian
cyberspace.

11



2.3 RISK-BASED APPROACH TO NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY

Our cybersecurity policy acknowledges that, rather than forego the
benefits of cyberspace in the interest of security, it is more productive
for us to accept the likelihood of cyber attacks, while proactively
emplacing measures to protect the integrity of cyber infrastructure.
On this premise, a sector-based approach to risk management will be
adopted to balance security measures with potential benefits in
recognition of the differences of each sectors risk profile and
consequences of cyber-attack. Furthermore, the focus of the
cybersecurity strategy is to prepare stakeholders, in the public and
private sector, for the adoption of the risk-based mindset to
cybersecurity through promotion of resilient disaster recovery,
business continuity, access control and crisis management measures,
amongst others. Additionally, we will ensure that our resiliency and
recovery plans are adequately designed to address the envisaged cyber
risks.

2.4 NATIONAL SECURITY IMPERATIVES

Our National Security Strategy 2019 identifies several issues that are
likely to influence the country's security priorities over the next 5
years. The ones which have a direct bearing on the Nigerian
cyberspace include cybercrime, technological challenges, socio-
political threats, hate speeches, fake news, terrorism, violent
extremism, economic challenges, as well as regional and global
security issues. In this light, the National Security Strategy recognises
that cyberspace is critical to our quest to address these national
security issues. However, the strategy also acknowledges that the
Nigerian cyberspace is vulnerable to some major forms of cyber-attack,
namely, cybercrime, cyber espionage, cyber conflict, cyber terrorism,
interference and destruction of critical national infrastructure and
influence operations. Therefore, the National Security Strategy
proposes the increased deployment of cybersecurity measures to
facilitate the protection of systems and structures against all forms of
cyber attacks. The Strategy also emphasises the need for government-
led approach as well as coordinated efforts across all sectors at
various levels to secure our cyberspace.

12



2.4.1 Nigeria's National Security Objectives

Our National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy draws its strength
from the National Security Strategy. It is therefore developed to
support the pillars of the National Security Strategy. Furthermore, the
national cybersecurity objectives are formulated according to the
national objectives spelt out in the National Security Strategy, which
include:

e Protecting the Nigerian People and Territory

e Promoting Economic Prosperity and Sustainable Development
e Promoting National Unity and Peaceful Co-existence

+. Enhancing Regional and International Interests

Government stakeholders will therefore collaborate with the private
sector, academia and industry to hinge on cybersecurity and facilitate
the realisation of these objectives.

2.5 NATIONAL CYBERSPACE DOCTRINES

Nigeria shall continue to make the interests of its citizens the priority
of her national cybersecurity strategy. Safeguarding the Nation's
information infrastructure is vital to fulfilling this objective. Nigeria
will therefore put in place the mandatory framework to facilitate
necessary multi-stakeholders collaborative and coordinated actions to
safeguard and secure its critical infrastructure, within its jurisdiction.
Nigeria will also emplace robust processes and functional world-class
systems to promote trust and confidence in the use of its cyberspace.

We will enhance our preparedness to combat emerging cyber threats
by investing in People, Process and Technology to develop critical skill
sets and assets to identify and repel any threats to our sovereignty
and national security. Nigeria shall also continue to collaborate with
local and international stakeholders to put in place infrastructure that
will ensure national preparedness for global economic competitiveness
in cyberspace.

Furthermore, Nigeria shall promote the economic benefits of
cyberspace by sustaining the balance between citizens” expectations
on freedom of information and privacy as well as government
responsibilities on  cybersecurity. We also  recognise the
transformational capability of emerging technologies. Therefore, our
approach is to mainstream a cybersecurity regulatory framework that

13



aligns with our national interests as well as international commitment
to e-governance and e-business. In addition, Nigeria is interconnected
with other countries in the cyber domain and hence not insulated
against irresponsible actions in cyberspace. Therefore, we will
mainstream voluntary non-binding norms of responsible state
behaviour in cyberspace through enhanced international awareness
and engagement. We will also continue to enhance our cyber defence
capability by investing in our military through skills and technological
assets acquisition to facilitate effective monitoring, identification,
prevention and repulsion of any cyber threats to our sovereignty and
national security.

14



Government

will lead by example, securiog
lis own networks and ensuring
that the provision of e-scrvices to ita
citizena is safe and secure, 1t will work
dosoly with tho operaors of Critical
National Infrastructure to protect the
delivery of these vital services. 1 will
ld to protect Nigeran
businesses and citiaens from oyber

also actas a shi

iburesatas.

International
Partners

sure effective

Citizens

will take responsibility for
—> accessing cyber services in a
a socure manner and for the

protection of their own personal
data

To

implementation of this strategy
we shall decpen our relationstiip S.A
with regional and global partners

dedicated to combating
eybercrime and addressing

eybersecurity whilst promoting
Nigeria's regional influence
and eybersecurity

interests

Businesses

will recognise the cybersecurity
responsibility they have lo their
customers, supplicra and employecs.
Thoir business will bo conducted in
such as wey cas do exar lbherenos lo
ey bersecurity guidance provided by
the Government



CHAPTER 3

STRENGTHENING CYBERSECURITY GOVERNANCE AND
COORDINATION

Nigeria recognises that an effective governance model and coordination
mechanism is fundamental to the enhancement of national
cybersecurity. To this end, a national structure is required to
coordinate and facilitate the necessary national cohesion at the
strategic, operational and tactical levels.

3.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
COORDINATION CENTRE

In line with the provisions of Section 41 of the Cybercrimes
(Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act 2015 (The Act) which empowers the
Office of the National Security Adviser to be the coordinating body for
national cybersecurity, the National Security Adviser (NSA) shall
establish the National Cybersecurity Coordination Centre (NCCC) to
ensure the implementation of Nigeria's national cybersecurity
programme in accordance with the provisions of relevant laws and
international principles. The NCCC shall be the local and international
focal point for cybersecurity in Nigeria. Accordingly, a strategic
structural model shall be adopted for the organisation, composition,
operation and functioning of the NCCC consistent with the roles and
responsibilities of the Office of the National Security Adviser, the
National Cybercrime Advisory Council and other functional
frameworks as encapsulated in The Act.

In accordance with Section 41 of The Act, a National Coordinator shall
be appointed for the administration and running of the day to day
functionalities of the NCCC. The NCCC shall be effectively organised,
staffed and resourced to coordinate the activities of all stakeholders
and ensure that cybersecurity in Nigeria is facilitated as a holistic
whole-of-society effort that impacts the public and private sector,
academia, industries, cybersecurity associations and advocacy groups
as well as the international community.

16



3.2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CYBERSECURITY STAKEHOLDERS

All stakeholders in the country's cyber ecosystem have specific and
collective roles to play in ensuring the progressive use of the Nigerian
cyberspace. Therefore, stakeholders must be aware of their
responsibilities as catalyst for action, participation and seamless
coordination of national cybersecurity. In accordance with the
mandate of each stakeholder, NCCC in conjunction with all key
players in the Nigerian cyberspace, shall identify and map out specific
responsibilities for stakeholders to engender defined, convergent and
unified efforts towards enhancing national cybersecurity. As a
pathway to ensure alignment and synergy of efforts, we shall establish
a Cybersecurity Dialogue Platform to enable stakeholders across
Nigeria's cybersecurity ecosystem engage in the necessary discourse
towards effective articulation of roles and responsibilities. Ultimately,
the sustainability and critical success factor of our national
cybersecurity programme is anchored on public-private partnership
and multi-stakeholder engagement.

17



MINES POWER
AND STEEL AND ENERGY

INDUSTRIAL AND

MANUFACTURING WATER

E INFORMATION,
SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS

AND EMERGENCY SCIENCE AND

SERVICES TECHNOLOGY

FOOD AND
AGRICULTURE

BANKING/FINANCE
AND INSURANCE

TRANSPORT HEALTH

DEFENCE
AND SECURITY

PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATION

EDUCATION




CHAPTER 4

FOSTERING PROTECTION OF CRITICAL NATIONAL
INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE

The nation depends on the functioning of certain information and
communications technology systems, networks and infrastructure to
drive vital national imperatives such as economic development,
commerce and financial transactions, social interactions, public
safety, power and water supply, medical and health, government
operations, national security and defence. These systems, networks
and infrastructure underpin our national life and ensure our existence
and survival as a country. Any disruption, destruction or interference
to the operation of these assets has the potential to undermine
government operations, social wellbeing, economic prosperity and
national security.

Therefore, the Federal Government of Nigeria is committed to the
development of necessary cohesive measures and strategic actions
towards assuring the security and protection of these systems,
networks and infrastructure. The Government therefore deems it
crucial to designate such systems, networks and infrastructure as
Critical National Information Infrastructure (CNI), as part of efforts to
protect their integrity and assure their continued operation. To this
end, Government has identified sectors across the Nigerian economy
where critical ICT assets are domiciled, in order to pave a path for
their designation as CNII. However, a key aspect of this process is the
registration of CNI assets by the various owners and operators. For
this purpose, Government created an online portal
(publisher.cert.gov.ng) to enable stakeholders that own and operate
these critical assets, to register the details of their infrastructure, as a
pathway towards joint development of modalities for their protection.

This Strategy therefore presents the Government's approach to CNII
protection. The strategy acknowledges that CNII protection is a shared
responsibility across government, private sector (the owners and
operators of critical information infrastructure) and the entire
populace. It is therefore our cardinal responsibility as a nation to
complement Government efforts towards ensuring the protection and
continuous operation of our CNII.

19



4.1 CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
AND RESILIENCE

The strategy articulates the various activities to be undertaken by
Government and other stakeholders towards CNII protection. To this
end, Nigeria will ensure a comprehensive approach to Critical
Information Infrastructure Protection and Resilience (CIIPR) through
the collective participation of stakeholders in the public and private
sector, including owners and operators of CNIl and the entire
cybersecurity community. We will assess risks to CNII through an
intelligent and information-led, risk management approach and secure
CNI against physical, human and cyber threats through collective and
sustainable efforts. Government will enhance CNII resilience by
reducing impact of unforeseen and unexpected incidents through
advanced planning and mitigation efforts, as well as effective
responses aimed at saving lives and ensuring rapid recovery of
essential services. We will also share relevant information across the
CNII community to build awareness and enable coordinated risk-
based decision making, while promoting learning and adaptation.

Nigeria will also ensure multi-stakeholder collaboration to set specific
national priorities considering resource availability, progress already
made, known capability gaps, and emerging trends and cybersecurity
risks. These will drive implementation and will be supplemented by
sectoral priorities. Performance measures will be set based on the
goals and priorities of each sector. We will continue to develop
appropriate categorisation of CNII in accordance with their priority for
protection based on their vulnerability and impact assessment.
Accordingly, we shall continue to update the comprehensive list of
CNI that require protection priorities and disseminate the CNIT list to
all relevant stakeholders while developing CNII protection plan in line
with this categorisation.

4.2 CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE SECTORS
A preliminary requirement for CIPR is the identification of the sectors.

Accordingly, this strategy  identifies 13 critical information
infrastructure sectors across the Nigerian economy.

20



4.2.1 Identified Sectors for CNII Protection

e Power and Energy

e. Water

e Information, Communications, Science and Technology
e Banking/Finance and Insurance
e Health

e Public Administration

e Education

e Defence and Security

e Transport

e Food and Agriculture

e Safety and Emergency Services

e Industrial and Manufacturing

e Mines and Steel

4.3 STRATEGIC INITIATIVES

4.3.1 Establish Effective Collaborative Partnership with CNII
Owners and Operators.

A significant proportion of the nation's critical infrastructure is
privately owned or operated on a commercial basis. Therefore,
partnership and collaboration will be engendered to help build
confidence and reliability for the continued operation of CNII. To this
end, a Trusted Information Sharing Network (TISN) shall be
established under the NCCC as a forum in which the owners and
operators of critical infrastructure would synergise and share
information on threats and vulnerabilities as well as develop strategies
and solutions to mitigate risks to the nation's CNI. The TISN shall
comprise owners and operators of CNII as well as stakeholders from
departments and agencies of government.

Stakeholders who own and operate CNII have a major undertaking
and collective responsibility to ensure the security of their systems.
Therefore, the NCCC shall promote a culture of risk awareness and
shared responsibility across stakeholders for CNII protection. This
culture shall be cascaded down to all individuals within the CNII
protection community through a hybrid top-down and bottom-up
approach. This will allow stakeholders across the sectors take

21



ownership and develop specific and tailored approach to CNII
protection in their various sectors.

4.3.2 Identify and  Evaluate Potential Critical National
Information Infrastructure

Government will work with owners and operators of critical
infrastructure to ensure periodic and continuous identification of
critical information infrastructure in the advent of emerging
technologies. Government will also conduct periodic audit and
evaluation to estimate the risk levels of the identified CNII. We will also
adopt a risk-based approach in the identification and prioritisation for
CNII protection.

4.3.3 Identify and Manage Cross-Sectoral Dependencies

Nigeria will continue to identify cyber risks that cut across more than
one sector of the economy, or threats that affect multiple sectors of the
economy simultaneously. This approach will assist CNI risk
management decision-making and help to inform Government's
actions on CIIPR. This approach also increases the potential for
effective sharing of risks to cope with certain incidents. The Critical
Infrastructure Program for Modelling and Analysis (CIPMA) is
proposed as a suitable solution to enhance the protection and
resilience of CNII in Nigeria.

Our strategy is to ensure that all sectors develop robust cyber risk
management procedures and capabilities that are sector-specific and
adaptive to emerging cyber threats in collaboration with other sectors
and in conjunction with guidelines from NCCC. Nigeria shall establish
a mechanism, through the TISN, for continuous information sharing
between all CNIl owners and operators as well as government
stakeholders.

4.3.4 Redundancy Mechanism for CNII and Essential Services

Nigeria shall continue to promote the incorporation of redundancy
mechanisms to enhance CNI] protection. To this end, we shall ensure
that backup mechanisms are developed to cater for communications
disruption along any node in the emergency response network. We
shall also continue to allocate resources to business continuity and
disaster recovery mechanisms. Moreover, Nigeria shall ensure that

22



communications redundancy measures are regularly tested to include
provision of fail over or backup sites and availability of redundancy
modes of connection, amongst others. We shall also promote the
establishment of sustainable cost effective and resilient mechanisms
designed to prevent reliance on single points of failure.

4.4 COORDINATION OF CRITICAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

Nigeria shall effectively coordinate the execution of its CNII protection.
To this end, the country shall develop criteria and best practices for
each CNII sector, including sector-level performance objectives as well
as establishment of feedback mechanism to NCCC and the regulatory
agency of government charged with the responsibility of managing the
sector. A National Critical Information Infrastructure Measurable
Program (CIIMP) shall also be developed in order to engender progress
monitoring and evaluation. On this premise, CNIl owners and
operators will take responsibility for safeguarding their systems and
networks in adherence to guidelines and standards stipulated by
NCCC. CNII owners, operators and Sector regulators would also be
obligated to participate in cybersecurity crisis response exercises and
drills to enhance preparedness for collective response to cyber
incidents. Additionally, government shall continue to collaborate with
relevant stakeholders towards building capacity and developing
professional skills for effective CNII protection.

4.5 CRITICAL NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION PLAN

Nigeria shall continue to strengthen its plan for protection of the
country's CNI. This Critical National Information Infrastructure
Protection Plan (CNIIPP) will be robust enough to ensure the security
and resilience of CNI. The plan will also incorporate clear risk
management procedures and mitigation mechanisms. The plan must
also engender the participation of all relevant stakeholders in the
protection of CNII. Furthermore, the plan must incorporate emergency
readiness and response mechanisms to facilitate disaster recovery and
business continuity. It must also ensure that standard operating
procedures and personnel vetting mechanisms are developed and
adhered to as guide for action by all stakeholders.

23



4.5.1 Objectives of the Critical National Information
Infrastructure Protection Plan

e Predict, identify, protect, detect, respond and facilitate the
recovery of CNII from cyber attacks and unintentional disruption
or damage including natural disasters.

e Share important and actionable information among the CNII
community in order to build awareness and provide risk-
informed decision-making.

e Promote cyber-drills and active incorporation of lessons learnt
into the CNII protection process.

4.5.2 National Vulnerability Management

National vulnerability assessment (NVA) shall be  periodically
conducted and integrated into the CNIIPP. NCCC in collaboration with
the sectoral CSIRTs shall coordinate the NVA with a view to
determining weaknesses in the nation's CNI. To this end, the NVA
Shall:

e Identify, analyse and assess threats to CNII to facilitate effective
risk management and mitigation.

e Assist Government in appreciating the level of preparedness, the
need to safeguard huge investments in information systems and
communications infrastructure, as well as commitment made to
global partners national ICT developmental goals.

e Set the path for the adoption of Security by Design practices as
an approach to build security measures into CNI.

e Pave a path for the documentation and archiving of all
vulnerabilities. A national record to this effect shall be
maintained for review purposes.

24



Sectoral
CSIRTs

(Government) )

(Private Sector) ]



CHAPTER 5

ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MANAGEMENT

The ability to pre-empt, respond and expeditiously mitigate the
potential consequences of cyber attacks while minimising the impact,
is crucial for sustainable governance, national security and socio-
economic wellbeing of the people. Accordingly, Nigeria recognises the
importance of a comprehensive framework for preparedness against
cyber attacks. Therefore, we will ensure robust, adaptive and reliable
response to cybersecurity incidents. This shall be achieved through
effective coordination of our national cybersecurity incident response
mechanism, strengthening of our cybersecurity incident response
teams and the development of a National Cybersecurity Crisis
Response Plan.

5.1 COORDINATION OF NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT
MANAGEMENT

The National Computer Emergency Response Team, known as the
Nigeria Computer Emergency Response Team (ngCERT), is the focal
point for our national cyber incident management. To this end,
ngCERT shall be domiciled under the NCCC to coordinate the
activities of sectoral Computer Security Incident Response Teams
(CSIRTs) and other relevant CSIRTs in the private sector.

Accordingly, ngCERT shall work closely with the sectoral CSIRTs, CNI
operators, government stakeholders and the entire cybersecurity
community to respond to cyber attacks. In the event of a national
cyber crisis, ngCERT shall coordinate the operational responses of the
Sectoral CSIRTs to engender a unified response to the threat.
Furthermore, NCCC shall support ngCERT by encouraging and
ensuring the:

e Establishment of CSIRTs across all relevant sectors of the
Nigerian economy, and through ngCERT, mobilise CSIRTs to
lend support to sectors or CNII operators, in the event of
exigencies or escalating cyber incidents.

e Promotion of international, multinational and bilateral
collaboration towards cybersecurity incident response and
management.

26



e Development of a framework for information sharing on
cybersecurity incidents as well as promotion of trust and culture
of collective and shared responsibility on incident management
across Sectoral CSIRTs and the entire cyber community.

e Establishment of processes, protocols and timelines for reporting
and escalation of cybersecurity incidents across all levels from
individual users, sectoral CSIRTs and CNII operators to ngCERT.

5.2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF NGCERT

ngCERT is established vide Section 41 (c) of the Cybercrimes
(Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act 2015 to ensure effective national
response to cybersecurity incidents occurring within or emanating
from the Nigerian cyberspace. To this end, ngCERT shall propose the
mobilisation of human resources from industry and academia where
necessary to complement the capacity of CSIRTs to deal with
escalating cyber attacks. ngCERT shall also plan and coordinate the
conduct of national cybersecurity crisis response drills and simulation
exercises to enable sectoral CSIRTs and other stakeholders better
understand their roles and responsibilities during cyber incidents
while providing a platform for  capability assessment and
enhancement. In addition, ngCERT shall establish, operate and
continually update a National Register of Cybersecurity Incidents in
conjunction with sectoral CSIRTs and other stakeholders.

5.3 ESTABLISHMENT OF SECTORAL AND OTHER CSIRTs

Sectoral and other CSIRTs shall be set up by the regulatory body or

any other coordinating body within a particular sector of the economy.

Key stakeholders on national cybersecurity within government

departments and agencies shall be listed to have a centralised,

harmonised and  unified approach to  cybersecurity incident
management. Sectoral CSIRTs shall:

e Serve as the single point of contact (POC) for each of the specific
sectors and coordinate incident response activities within the
sector.

e Promote trust and confidence among stakeholders in their
respective sectors.

e Facilitate information sharing with ngCERT and other relevant
stakeholders.

27



e Facilitate provision of criteria, measures, standards, guidelines
and best practices for the sector in line with national
cybersecurity measures prescribed by ngCERT.

e Undertake  cybersecurity  readiness, capacity building,
information security assurance and compliance administration
for their respective sectors.

5.4 NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CRISIS RESPONSE PLAN

The National Cybersecurity Crisis Response Plan shall outline the
protocols governing the response of ngCERT, sectoral CSIRTs, CNI
owners and operators, government stakeholders and other members of
the cybersecurity community in the event of cyber-attack. The plan
will incorporate simulations and drills that can prepare stakeholders
for a whole-of-nation response to cyber attacks while also serving as a
platform for capability assessment and improvement. As part of
arrangements to strengthen the national crisis response plan, NCCC
shall, through ngCERT, design, plan, conduct and evaluate national
cybersecurity crisis response exercises and drills, on a periodic basis.

5.5 INITIATIVES FOR MANAGING CYBERSECURITY INCIDENTS

The initiatives for managing cybersecurity incidents shall be as
follows:

5.5.1 Cyber Emergency Monitoring System

We shall operate a Cyber Emergency Monitoring System (CEMS) for
effective detection, identification and interception of cyber threats. The
CEMS will be established under the coordination of ngCERT to identify
indicators for potential threats to the nation's cyberspace. Based on
the potential threat identified by the CEMS, alerts and warnings will
be issued by ngCERT to various Sectoral CSIRTs, agencies and entities
for rapid response. Internet service providers and internet exchanges
shall also interface with ngCERT for effective utilization of a unified
national alert and warning system to be established and maintained
by NCCC.

5.5.2 Detection and Response

The deployment of CEMS will ensure that all detected cyber incidents

are promptly communicated by ngCERT and relative sectoral CSIRTs

to affected persons, businesses, organisations or government

establishments. In scenarios where there is no local expertise to
28



respond to cyber incidents, details of such incidents shall be escalated
to ngCERT or the relative sectoral CSIRT. Such incidents shall then be
recorded, reviewed and resolved following an established incident
management process.

5.6 MECHANISM FOR CYBER INCIDENT REPORTING AND
INFORMATION SHARING

The global dimension of cyber threat requires policy action and
strategic measures on Cyber Incidents Reporting and Information
Sharing, both at the national and international level. At the national
level, ngCERT shall develop an Auto Cyber-Indicator Sharing (ACIS)
System as a national free-to-join system by government, private sector
and non-government entities to facilitate real time exchange of
information on cybersecurity related incidents. The strategic scope of
information sharing on cyber incident shall include threat indicators,
malicious Internet Protocol addresses, intrusion attempts, and
phishing emails, amongst others. This scope shall be expanded to the
global scale in collaboration with stakeholders in the international
community.

5.7 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT TO ENHANCE  INCIDENT
MANAGEMENT

Government shall promote the development of human resources for
enhancement of incident prevention and response. Efforts shall focus
on improving the capacity of incident response teams to utilize
emerging technologies to manage cyber threats, such as the use of
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning concepts to analyse data
and identify potential cyber risks. To this end, Government effort shall
be geared towards promoting ¡incident management Capacity
development across public and private sector organisations in the
country. We shall also strengthen incentives for public and private
sector organisations and institutions to encourage capacity
development of their CSIRTs. Efforts shall also focus on encouraging
stakeholders to deploy and sustain effective operation of state-of-the-
art technologies for Security Operations Centres (SOCs) across the
country.

29



5.8 COLLABORATIVE PARTNERSHIP FOR INCIDENT
MANAGEMENT

The Nigerian government recognises that shared and collective
responsibility is crucial to the attainment of effective incident
management. Therefore, Government has taken proactive steps to re-
invigorate measures to address the rising cyber threats through the
adoption of collaborative partnership model which is based on a
hybrid combination of public-private partnership (PPP) and multi-
stakeholder partnership (MSP). This approach stems from the
understanding that businesses across the private sector have a
significant share of the responsibility to protect the nation's systems
and networks from cyber threats. Therefore, a collaborative
partnership model is needed to build the requisite synergy of
government, industry, businesses, academia and international
stakeholders, amongst others, towards enhanced incident response.

5.8.1 Establishment of Collaborative Partnership Model

A National Technical Working Group  (NTWG)  comprising
representatives from the private sector, government organizations and
representatives of international multi-stakeholder partners shall be
established and coordinated by the NCCC to:

+  —Collaborate with other countries, industry, academia, civil society
and other stakeholders towards advancing support for incident
management technology development, digital safety training, and
software and hardware systems security enhancement.

+ Interface with stakeholders in Government, private sector and the
international community to jointly develop and implement a
Collaborative Partnership Cybersecure Framework that assures the
security of the nation's digital infrastructure.

+ Promote the establishment of a Collaborative Partnership-driven
Research and Development Centre of Excellence to cater for the
shortage of cybersecurity skills as well as a vehicle to propel local
development of cybersecurity products and services.

5.8.2 Objectives of Collaborative Partnership Model

+ To develop and implement a hybrid PPP and MSP action plan to
support cybersecurity incident management.

30



+ To provide and nurture a sustainable trusted platform for national
cooperation, understanding and interactions among all stakeholders,
while managing all the build-up processes that will lead to the
harmonised agreements on national  cybersecurity incident
management.

+ To create and nurture trusted forums to address common
cybersecurity challenges, national discourse and dialogue that will
enhance cooperation and understanding among various groups on
national cybersecurity effort.

+ To facilitate the development of policies to ensure that
cybersecurity considerations are prioritised in the domestic
development of software and infrastructure components.

+ To support the development of policies to govern the cybersecurity
marketplace and consider certification for both imported and local
cybersecurity products and services.

+ To promote discussion between the public and private sectors on
cyber-insurance coverage, to identify whether there is a need for
cyber-insurance products or services based on perceived cyber
threats.

31






CHAPTER 6

STRENGTHENING LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

Cyber threats have become more dynamic, pervasive and detrimental
to  societal safety and  wellbeing.  Individuals, businesses,
organisations, government functions, essential services and critical
infrastructure across the country are now faced with sophisticated
risks emanating from  cyberspace. Moreover, perpetrators of
cybercrime and other malicious cyber activities have demonstrated the
ability to conduct attacks across the entire spectrum of cyberspace
with attendant dire consequences on victims. This brings to fore the
need for robust legal and regulatory framework to facilitate a proactive
approach to confront and curtail these threats.

The Government is responsible for improving and updating federal and
state laws to combat cybercrime and enhance the capacity of the
nation to address cyber incidents and protect the Nigerian
Cyberspace. To this end, this strategy shall support the amendment of
our existing Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act, 2015. The
strategy shall also ensure the harmonisation of provisions in other
legislations relating to e-business, online consumer protection and
criminal database amongst others. Furthermore, it will boost efforts to
promote online child and gender protection while developing the
capacity of the judiciary and law enforcement to enhance their
effectiveness to address cybercrime.

6.1 AMENDMENT OF CYBERCRIME LEGISLATION

The foremost legal framework on cybersecurity in Nigeria is the
Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act 2015, (hereafter the
Act). The Act is well developed and addresses several aspects of
cybercrime and other cybersecurity issues. However, in line with the
dynamic and emergent nature of cybersecurity, the focus of this
strategy is to review and amend the Act in order to address new
aspects not included in the current legislation. The Cybercrime
Advisory Council is charged with driving the process of amendment of
the Act in consultation and collaboration with relevant stakeholders
across Nigeria's cyber ecosystem. The amendment of the Act is
expected to consider, amongst others, the following areas:

33



e Penalties for breaches or disruption to CNII

e Timelines for cyber incident reporting

e Regulation of cybersecurity service providers

e Allotment of powers to NCCC to  coordinate national
cybersecurity and anchor investigation of cyber breaches

e Identity theft

e Enhanced enforcement of cybersecurity legislation

e Lawful interception

e Child and gender online protection

e Review of penalties

6.2 ENACTMENT AND  HARMONISATION OF NEW AND
EXISTING LEGISLATIONS

Government will ensure the enactment and harmonisation of new and
existing legislations. Currently, there is no primary legislation on data
protection and privacy in Nigeria. This informs the need for a national
legislation providing for an independent regulator for data protection.
Recent migration of businesses and interactions to the digital domain
also makes it imperative to develop a unified national legislation for
data protection.

We will focus on strengthening National Data Governance and
Protection of Digital Intellectual Property. We will also focus on
strengthening public service delivery, research, economic promotion,
and security and development through National Data Governance
which will ensure the safeguard of Nigeria's digital economy. The
strategy will further ensure the protection and safeguard of the
nation's digital content through regulations and guidelines regardless
of the medium it is held on.

Additionally, the need for integration of digital identity framework as
an element of national cybersecurity is also expedient. In this regard,
Nigeria will adopt the following strategy options:

e Strengthen legislative, technical and policy initiatives to fulfil the
goals of national cybersecurity programmes.

e National Data Governance and Protection of Digital Intellectual
Property.

e Ensure harmonisation of e-business laws in line with global best
practices.

e Development and enactment of Data Protection and Privacy law.

34



e Provision of legal protection for entities and individuals who
disclose vulnerabilities.

e Provision of a legislative framework for child and gender online
protection.

e Provision of a legislative framework for online consumer
protection.

e Provision of a legislative framework for bug bounty.

e Integration of digital identity framework as an element of
national cybersecurity strategy.

e Reduce reliance on foreign-hosted cloud services for storing
personal data of Nigerian Citizens.

6.3 INTERNET SAFETY AND CHILD ONLINE PROTECTION

Increasingly, children are embracing the use of cyber resources
facilitated through the availability of Internet in homes, schools and
other locations. While this availability of the Internet has significant
advantages for children, there are harmful social media contents and
illicit materials, being distributed within cyberspace, which can exploit
the innocence of minors thereby posing a risk to their well-being.

Such exposure of children to the Internet can trigger cyber abuse and
online exploitation with consequences that are inimical to our national
dignity. Therefore, this strategy establishes that any act against a
child which is illegal in the physical environment is equally illegal
online. The focus of government is to protect children from exposure to
adverse online materials. To this end, our focus is the development of
control mechanisms to prevent accessibility and distribution of
malicious online materials, launching of a national child online safety
awareness agenda, creation of a national register of convicted online
child abuse offenders and establishment of channels for reporting
incidents on child online abuse.

6.3.1 Mechanisms to Prevent Distribution of Illicit Content
Online

Nigeria is committed to the detection, identification, removal as well as
prevention of the distribution of illicit or malicious content on the
Internet. We shall therefore engender the necessary synergy between
service providers, law enforcement and the judiciary to combat the

35



distribution, availability and accessibility of illicit content online. To
this end:

e NCCC shall interface with service providers and relevant
government agencies to promote the development of control
measures to combat the distribution of malicious digital contents
and materials targeted at the young population.

e Regulatory agencies shall ensure that service providers and
owners of online platforms take proactive measures to prevent
accessibility to malicious content that are targeted at children as
well as integration of parental control measures on websites and
applications on mobile devices. This shall be driven through the
constitution of a Task Force on Child Online Protection.

e Stakeholders shall also ensure that all Child Abuse Materials
(CAM) online are channelled into a centralised national resource.
Actions shall entail outlawing any form of remote enticement of
minors into inappropriate sexual contact or sexual activity,
possession, production and distribution of CAM, irrespective of
the intent to distribute. This will include taking additional
responsive steps to disrupt the trafficking of CAM and creating
awareness about the illegality of being in possession of CAM for
any purpose.

e Nigeria shall engage in bilateral and multilateral collaboration
and information exchanges with relevant law enforcement
authorities and investigative bodies in other countries.

e We shall also develop evaluation mechanism to promote zero
tolerance of online child abuse and  exploitation while
spearheading the development of Child Online Abuse and
Exploitation Combating Strategy (COAECS).

6.3.2 National Child Online Safety Awareness Campaign

Nigeria is dedicated to promoting education and awareness about the
issues of child online safety as a prerequisite for enhancing Internet
safety for children. Accordingly:

e National Orientation Agency (NOA) shall interface with other
relevant agencies for the development of programmes to promote
awareness on child online safety. Efforts shall be directed at

36



ensuring that child online protection awareness agenda is
enshrined in all aspects of our national orientation programmes.

e We shall also develop platforms for stakeholders to partner in
educating children on the need to speak out against any form of
sexual harassments or molestations online.

e Government agencies and actors in the private sector shall
collaborate to promote the provision of appropriate long term
support for victims of online child abuse.

6.3.3 National Register of Convicted Offenders

Federal Ministry of Justice (FMOJ) shall interface with NCCC to
develop a register for convicted child online abuse offenders. The
register shall serve as a watch list and online database that will be
accessible to relevant stakeholders that host the list of convicted sex
offenders in the country.

6.3.4 Incident Reporting and Investigation

NCCC shall through ngCERT and sectoral CSIRTs develop and sustain
channels for reporting incidents of child online abuse. Efforts shall
focus on creating platforms to receive reports from entities around the
globe on illegal behaviour or content. NCCC shall also enhance the
capacity of the National Digital Forensics Laboratory to obtain details
of reported incidents, and process and interpret forensic evidences
from digital devices relating to online crimes against children.

6.4 GENDER RIGHTS ONLINE

We recognise the rights and importance of the active involvement of
women in the use of cyberspace. We are also committed to promoting
the inclusiveness and active participation of women in the complete
lifecycle of activities in our cyber ecosystem. Nigeria is also up to date
on the global and domestic digital gender gap and the country is
dedicated to breaking the barriers hindering accessibility for women.
Furthermore, combating online violence against women is a crucial
priority for the Nigerian Government. We are therefore committed to
the development of mechanisms to create a safe cyberspace and
protect women online presence.

37



Against this backdrop, our approach is to prioritise the promotion of
online safety awareness and education for women. We shall spearhead
the development of a multi-stakeholder forum to drive the
development of online gender protection and participation initiatives.
Furthermore, we shall provide the necessary support for organisations
anchoring gender promotion initiatives to strengthen advocacy. We
shall also develop mechanisms to empower women with the requisite
capacity while also creating opportunities in the cybersecurity
ecosystem across government, industry and academia. In the area of
online safety, NCCC in conjunction with regulatory agencies shall
interface with Internet service providers and owners of online
platforms towards enhancing security and privacy of women online.
We shall also establish and promote mechanisms for reporting online
violence against women.

6.5 CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
JUDICIARY

A major focus of this strategy is to enhance the capacity of the law
enforcement community to investigate cybercrime and handle digital
evidences, and training of the judiciary to prosecute and adjudicate on
cybercrime. This will be driven through a continuous, comprehensive
and specialised training program developed to educate lawyers,
judges, prosecutors, law enforcement officials, forensics investigators
and other specialists. For this purpose, relevant government bodies
shall collaborate with NCCC, academia and industry towards capacity
development to address cybercrime.

We shall also promote requisite capacity building through specialised
training courses, curricular development and skills acquisition
championed by universities and professional training institutions.
Furthermore, we shall promote synergy between relevant stakeholders
to build the capacity of law enforcement and judiciary to investigate
and prosecute Internet related crimes against children and other
vulnerable groups, and enhance the ability of the Courts to handle
digital forensic evidence and preside over cybercrime cases.

6.6 NATIONAL DIGITAL FORENSICS LABORATORY

The National Digital Forensics Laboratory (NDFL) shall be established

under the NCCC to provide the requisite facilities for digital forensics

investigation and intelligence gathering on cyber related issues. The
38



NCCC shall boost the capacity of the NDFL through deployment of
adequate human resources and technology solutions to automate and
facilitate rapid surfing, processing and extraction of digital information
from devices which would be used as evidence for effective
prosecution. NDFL shall also, where necessary, collaborate with
industry and academia to provide a platform for training on
cybercrime investigation skills-based courses such as malware
analysis, cyber intelligence gathering and digital forensics, amongst
others. Efforts shall also focus on certification, support and regulatory
oversight functions to foster collaboration and development of digital
forensics laboratories across the country.

6.7 MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMBATING
CYBERCRIME

As part of efforts to ensure our commitment to the protection of
society from transnational cybercrime, the strategy engenders
development of effective multilateral and bilateral coordination
mechanisms. This includes establishment of frameworks and
channels for mutual legal assistance, facilitating cross border
investigation, prosecution and transfer of digital evidence as well as
related cross-border processing of cybercriminals. To this end,
stakeholders shall collaborate and share relevant information with
global partners as well as international and multilateral organisations.
We shall also promote sustainable cooperation and partnership
amongst stakeholders to prosecute and combat transnational
cybercrime.

39






CHAPTER 7

ENHANCING CYBER DEFENCE CAPABILITY

The development of our cyber defence posture and capability is crucial
to national cybersecurity. The need for an enhanced cyber defence
capability is even more pronounced with the increased use of
cyberspace by domestic, foreign and transnational state and non-state
actors to perpetrate cyber terrorism, cyber espionage and other forms
of organised cyber attacks. Therefore, our strategy shall develop the
capability of our military and defence establishments to identify,
detect and effectively deter any form of organised cyber-attack
launched on the nation. To this end, our Defence Space
Administration (DSA) shall interface with NCCC for effective
coordination of activities of relevant stakeholders in the armed forces,
development of an effective cyber defence plan and training of our
military to protect the Nigerian cyberspace.

7.1 NATIONAL CYBER DEFENCE COORDINATION

In consonance with the provisions of extant domestic and
international laws, DSA shall mobilise its capabilities for cyber
operations to complement Nigeria's diplomatic, information, military
and economic elements of national power. Our focus is therefore to
develop the necessary capabilities to effectively defend our military
networks and systems, government ICT assets and the country's CNI
domiciled with the private sector, against national cyber attacks. Our
efforts shall also extend to the collective development of cyber
capabilities to support the mandate and operations of our armed
forces towards the protection of our territorial integrity. Therefore, we
recognise that effective development of our cyber defence capability
relies on close collaboration across government, private sector and our
international partners.

Against this backdrop, DSA in line with its mandate to provide
resilient and affordable space and cyberspace capabilities for the
Nigerian military, will work closely with the NCCC, agencies of
government and think tanks from industry and academia to
implement our national cyber defence strategy. To this end, the DSA
shall assign roles to and coordinate the activities of the cyber

41



establishments of the armed forces to ensure readiness to defend the
nation against cyber attacks.

The Defence CSIRT and Defence Security Operations Centre (SOC)
shall be set up under the DSA. Similar to other sectoral CSIRTs across
the country, the activities of the Defence CSIRT shall be coordinated
by ngCERT in the areas of information sharing, protection of CNII,
cyber incident management, technology and skills transfer, and
conduct of cyber drills and exercises. NCCC shall also support DSA by
promoting the maintenance of necessary communication channels and
coordination arrangements to ensure that all stakeholders across
government and the private sector mobilise in unison to protect the
nation from any national cyber-attack.

7.2 NATIONAL CYBER DEFENCE PLAN

DSA shall work closely with NCCC to develop a National Cyber
Defence Plan (NCDP) for the nation. The plan shall identify the
relevant stakeholders and delineate their roles in the event of cyber-
attack against the country. The plan shall also outline arrangements
for protection of CNII and protocols for rendering or requesting for
assistance from ngCERT and the Sectoral CSIRTs. Furthermore, the
plan shall engender collaboration with regional and international
defence CSIRTs and multinational organisations for addressing cross-
border cyber attacks while embracing the requisite restraints obligated
under international law.

7.3 CYBER DEFENCE CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

As a pathway for ensuring effective implementation of our NCDP, our
efforts shall focus on maintaining an operations-ready Defence CSIRT.
We shall also ensure that the necessary synergy is developed between
our Defence CSIRT and other sectoral CSIRTs for effective cyber
operations and protection of CNII across all sectors of the economy.
We therefore recognise that the implementation of our NCDP relies on
the availability of personnel with high standard of cybersecurity
training supported with state of the art technological capabilities.

On this premise, DSA shall ensure that all the components of the
cyber defence structure are empowered with the relevant knowledge

42



and technical capacity to defend the country against cyber attacks.
Based on this, the DSA shall interface with NCCC, security and law
enforcement agencies, academia and industry to ensure focused
arrangements for professional training and technical skills acquisition
for personnel. Capacity development shall focus on training to
familiarise personnel with cyber law as it affects cross-border
operations. DSA shall also make necessary arrangements to
continually empower the Defence CSIRT with relevant and up-to-date
technological capabilities to enhance cyber operations.

43






CHAPTER 8

PROMOTING A THRIVING DIGITAL ECONOMY

Nigeria recognises the role that cyberspace plays in the propagation of
an ICT-driven economy for the country. Cyberspace, especially the
Internet and social media, provides the platform for connectivity,
interaction and innovation, which opens up a plethora of new
opportunities for businesses and commercial activities to flourish.
These opportunities offered by cyberspace, if effectively harnessed,
have the potential to project our economy and accelerate the country's
pace towards achieving the broader socio-economic objectives.

Our focus is therefore to use cybersecurity as a catalyst to promote
the use of the Internet and social media for increased commercial,
financial and related government activities, thereby facilitating a
thriving digital economy for Nigeria. We shall build trust and
confidence in the Nigerian cyberspace, nurture a safe and resilient
online environment, develop a robust cybersecurity workforce, develop
and promote indigenous cybersecurity technology products, and drive
a high level of awareness on cyber threats and cybersecurity practices
to mitigate risks.

8.1 SAFE AND TRUSTED ONLINE ENVIRONMENT

We strive to create an online environment that is safe, resilient and
trusted by society and businesses within and outside Nigeria. We
envisage a transformation of our cyber ecosystem to a user-friendly
digital environment where the security of personal and sensitive
information is assured, safety of online activities is guaranteed, and
the rights of users, businesses and service providers are protected.

Our approach is to develop processes and set actions in motion that
will support and promote the use of e-business, e-transactions, and e-
government platforms in the Nigerian cyberspace. Such drive requires
the emplacement of mechanisms that ensure that Internet users,
businesses and commercial services including facilitators of online
government services, develop a responsible cybersecurity culture and
behaviour and foster the security and resilience of services hosted on
the Internet.

45



8.1.1 Responsible Cybersecurity Culture and Behaviour

Government will lead by example through the institution of
responsible cybersecurity culture and behaviour. This shall be
driven by NCCC, in collaboration with heads of government
departments and agencies. To this end, NCCC in conjunction
with heads of government bodies, shall prioritise the
development of periodic training programmes for government
employees to improve understanding of responsible
cybersecurity culture and encourage the  adoption of
cybersecurity best practices when carrying out day-to-day
activities online.

Heads of ministries, departments and agencies shall be
responsible for developing, institutionalising and promoting the
adoption of practices that ensure responsible cybersecurity
behaviour in their respective jurisdictions, especially when
handling government functions online.

At the private sector level, the responsibility to drive good
behaviour online shall be entrusted to companies and
businesses under the supervision of regulatory agencies across
all sectors of the Nigerian economy. By this, NCCC shall prompt
regulatory agencies to encourage service providers and operators
of online digital services to introduce mechanisms that protect
platforms and foster cybersecurity best practices by employees.
Regulatory agencies are also charged with ensuring that private
sector executives prioritise the adoption of these cybersecurity
work practices in their organisations.

For users of the Internet among the general public, a whole-of-
society approach would be adopted by promoting practices such
as incident and cybercrime reporting and other activities to
make the public proactive in ensuring their safety online. To this
end, NCCC, regulatory agencies, Sectoral CSIRTs, academia and
industry stakeholders shall promote incident reporting through
regular provision of publicly available materials to prompt users
to take collective responsibility of protecting the online
community as well as their own personal presence on the
Internet.

46



We are conscious of the role that legislation will play in the
enhancement of personal information protection online.
Therefore, Government shall prioritise promulgation of Nigeria's
Data Protection Act as a catalyst for privacy and protection of
user and corporate information on the Internet.

8.1.2 Secure and Resilient Online Services

Our priority is to improve the level of trust and confidence that
our people and the international community have on online
activities and services in the Nigerian cyberspace, especially
digital financial transactions, e-government and e-business
platforms. We are also conscious of a rising number of other new
activities moving to the cyber domain, in the areas of e-health
and online educational services, amongst others.

As way of ensuring security, resilience and trust in e-government
platforms and other public sector services hosted online, NCCC
shall interface with relevant government stakeholders across the
sectors of the Nigerian economy to drive adoption of digital
standards that ensure security, transparency and accountability
of services hosted online. This will encourage the use of
platforms that provide end-to-end encryption, display indicators
of authenticity on websites and applications, incorporate
channels for user reviews and feedback, and adopt user privacy
policies, amongst others.

Regulatory agencies shall also tow the path of government to
encourage operators of online services in the private sector to
adopt similar measures to secure their Internet-based platforms
and promote user trust. Stakeholders are also entrusted to
make requisite effort to continually leverage social media,
mainstream media and other platforms for advertisement, to
promote trust, confidence and utilisation of e-government, e-
business and e-transactions services.

We shall promote the deployment of mechanisms to prevent
unauthorised electronic transmission of data from
establishments of stakeholders across the public and private
sector. Our focus is to protect information from being stolen or
compromised or disseminated illicitly across cyberspace. This
shall be achieved by encouraging stakeholders to deploy

47



templates, checklists, tools and processes to detect and prevent
unauthorised access or misuse of sensitive data, in line with
extant laws governing data in transit, data in use and data at
rest.

e As a whole-of-government approach, NCCC shall lead the way in
establishing the channel for Nigeria to work with global partners,
international businesses and multinational organisations to
facilitate secure cross-border data flows and online transactions
built on transparency, accountability, mutual trust and
confidence.

8.2 ROBUST CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE

Cybersecurity human resources development and skills acquisition is
instrumental to the creation of the enabling digital environment for
online economic activities to strive. The role of Government is to set
the platform for capacity development and skills acquisition in
cybersecurity as a pathway for the generation of the cyber workforce
required for the Nigerian cyberspace. This can only be achieved
through the creation of opportunities for the Nigerian people to take
up interest and amass the education, knowledge and professional
skills required to meet the high demand for cybersecurity experts in
the digital market. Our focus is therefore to enhance availability,
uptake and quality of education in cybersecurity, encourage
cybersecurity skills acquisition and professional development and
promote attainment of knowledge in cybersecurity through research
and development.

8.2.1 Cybersecurity Education

e Federal Ministry of Education (FMoE) shall interface with
regulatory bodies in the education sector to promote uptake of
cybersecurity courses and curricular at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels in Nigerian universities. FMoE and
regulatory bodies in the education sector shall also be entrusted
with efforts to promote the uptake of cybersecurity courses and
programmes by schools and institutions of learning across
Nigeria.

e FMOE shall interface with regulatory agencies in the education
sector and other stakeholders to map out actions to enhance

48



cybersecurity education. Stakeholders shall also collaborate to
ensure that national investments in education meet the
demands of the cybersecurity environment across all sectors of
the Nigerian economy. This approach is envisaged to pave way
for provision of adequately trained cybersecurity academic
teachers, training materials and other resources.

8.2.2 Skills Acquisition and Professional Development

Our approach is to encourage individuals to take up professional
skills acquisition in the field of cybersecurity. To this end, our
strategy prioritises the establishment of a National Cybersecurity
Training Institute (NCTI), under the organisational structure of
NCCC, to spearhead skills acquisition and professional
development through multiple streams of  standardised
cybersecurity certification courses, career tracks and
programmes. NCCC is entrusted with the responsibility of
driving this initiative as a pathway to build the necessary talent
pool required for the cybersecurity market in the public and
private sectors.

NCCC shall provide the relevant guidelines for the establishment
of cybersecurity training centres across the country.
Furthermore, it shall promote the creation of forums where
cybersecurity stakeholders from academia, industry,
cybersecurity societies and associations, advocacy groups and
experts can interact towards proposing initiatives to accelerate
the pace of cybersecurity skills acquisition and professional
development in Nigeria.

8.2.3 Research, Development and Innovation

e

The attainment of knowledge and expertise in cybersecurity shall
also be driven through promotion of research and development.
This approach will encourage cybersecurity professionals and
businesses to enhance their levels of expertise to improve service
delivery while also promoting close partnership between
academia and industry.

FMOoE shall interface with regulatory bodies in the education
sector, stakeholders in academia and key players in industry to

49



draw up roadmaps to encourage and harness cybersecurity
research and development efforts in Nigeria.

8.3 INDIGENOUS CYBERSECURITY TECHNOLOGY

Our digital market comprises a combination of cybersecurity
technologies developed indigenously as well as those imported or
procured from outside Nigeria. Currently, most of the cybersecurity
products and solutions used in our systems and networks across the
public and private sector, as well as those in the market, are
developed or manufactured overseas. We acknowledge the benefits of
these imported systems and software solutions to the enhancement of
our cybersecurity posture. However, we also recognise the criticality of
developing and expanding our own indigenous  cybersecurity
technology systems and products market. Our focus is therefore to
enhance the development and availability of competitive indigenous
cybersecurity products and services. This requires the collaborative
effort of stakeholders in industry and academia especially in the area
of research and development.

Government efforts to this effect shall be anchored by NCCC in
collaboration with relevant stakeholders, and it shall focus on creating
the platforms for cybersecurity technology incubation in Nigeria. By
this, relevant stakeholders shall promote the establishment of
cybersecurity technology innovation centres and laboratories in
institutions of higher learning and in the ICT industry across Nigeria.
NCCC shall also drive initiatives to provide support and incentives for
projects that uplift the indigenous cybersecurity technology market in
Nigeria. Furthermore, we shall encourage and promote the growth of
cyber insurance products and services.

8.4 RAISING AWARENESS

National efforts for raising awareness on cybersecurity shall follow a
whole-of-society approach. National Orientation Agency (NOA) shall
drive a coordinated national effort, in conjunction with all relevant
stakeholders in the public and private sector, to continually sensitise
the general public, businesses, organisations and government
establishments on various pertinent cybersecurity issues. Essentially,
awareness programmes shall be structured to address the various
areas of interest, including, cyber threats and risks online,
proliferation of cybercrime and fake news, highlight of education,
training and employment opportunities available in the field of
50



cybersecurity, and ongoing research and development as well as
international and regional engagements. NOA shall also interface with
NCCC and other relevant stakeholders to complement existing
national and international awareness raising initiatives such as the
National Cybersecurity Awareness Month (NCAM), amongst others.

Our national efforts shall include the targeted training of personnel
who shall anchor the delivery of awareness activities and programs.
Stakeholders shall also leverage social media and mainstream media
to raise awareness and initiate public discussion. Furthermore,
relevant government agencies and businesses shall interface with
mass media providers to create awareness on prevailing cybersecurity
issues in their sectors. As part of this, stakeholders shall take steps to
provide training for media providers to improve their understanding of
cybersecurity issues affecting the country.

8.5 VIRTUAL ASSETS

We recognise the potential impact of virtual assets and Financial
Technology (FINTECH) on our financial industry and by implication
our economic security. However, considering that virtual assets create
platforms for anonymity or concealment of financial transactions
which could facilitate Money Laundering (ML) and Terrorist Financing
(TF) amongst other illicit activities, we deem it expedient to apply risk-
based approach to mitigating the threats associated with virtual assets
and the activities of Virtual Assets Service Providers (VASP).
Government is also aware that virtual currencies are fast becoming a
currency of choice in cyber-related criminal activities across the globe.

Our approach is therefore for relevant government agencies to
collaborate and advocate adoption of mechanisms to drive progressive
use of virtual currency while addressing the associated risks. To this
end, we shall focus on strengthening existing legal frameworks and
sensitisation of stakeholders across government and the private
sector. We will also leverage regional and global cooperation for
mitigating the risks associated with cross-border movement of virtual
assets.

51



Deployment of
quality controls
and security
processes

Deployment
of robust and
high-quality
cybersecurity

solutions

Agile,

Y Adaptive and (7)
| Responsive

Digital
Landscape

Emplacement
of good practices
and standards for

cybersecurity

technologies



CHAPTER 9

ASSURANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Nigeria's cyber domain is dominated by a myriad of ICT systems and
related infrastructure and thus requires robust Assurance Monitoring
and Evaluation (AME). These ICT assets are the bedrock of the digital
environment and by implication catalysts for national development.
They facilitate the operation and interconnectivity of systems in
cyberspace and play a critical role in ensuring cybersecurity. With the
current proliferation of cyber threats, the role of these ICT systems in
ensuring cybersecurity is now more crucial. The pervasive nature of
cyber threats now requires ICT systems that are agile, adaptive and
responsive.

We recognise the role of these ICT systems in strengthening the
security posture of our digital landscape. Hence, we envisage the
widespread deployment of robust and high-quality cybersecurity
technology to safeguard our presence in cyberspace. Our approach is
therefore to engender the emplacement of good practices and
standards for our cybersecurity technologies and the deployment of
quality controls and security processes.

9.1 STANDARDS AND GOOD PRACTICES

Our focus is to strengthen ongoing efforts in the public and private
sector to ensure the security of data transmission and processing
systems and platforms against unauthorised access and cybersecurity
threats. Therefore, our efforts shall concentrate on enhancing the
design and adoption of standards and good practices related to the
procurement, development,  utilisation and deployment of
cybersecurity hardware and software technology systems.
Stakeholders in government and industry shall jointly develop and
promote the adoption of ICT and cybersecurity standards across
government departments and agencies and the private sector, in line
with international good practices. NITDA shall interface with NCCC
and other relevant stakeholders to champion this drive through
promotion of guidelines as well as compliance arrangements.
Accordingly, government departments and agencies have a role to
ensure adherence to stipulated guidelines and standards.

53



Furthermore, NCCC shall provide oversight through the periodic audit
of CNIT and any other entity as may be determined. For the private
sector, companies and businesses shall take the lead in promoting
and ensuring adherence to laid out standards under the guidance of
relative regulatory agencies. These efforts shall be complemented by
capacity building of cybersecurity compliance officers and CNII
auditors to maintain necessary oversight. Additionally, we shall
promote efforts to interface with global partners to ensure continuous
alignment with international standards and good practices. Our efforts
shall also focus on gathering adequate cyber threat intelligence to
protect our digital economic infrastructure. This shall be driven
through effective identification of financial technology
systems/products and development of mechanisms to enhance their
resilience to mitigate financial crime.

9.2 QUALITY CONTROL AND SECURITY PROCESSES

We shall continue to support ongoing efforts in the public and private
sector to enhance the quality of cybersecurity hardware and software
systems deployed to support government operations, businesses and
commercial and financial services in cyberspace. Our focus shall be
the emplacement of oversight on  procurement, development,
deployment and operation of technology systems through guidelines
and coordinated audit and clearance arrangements. Government shall
drive the process of ensuring that businesses and organisations
abstain from the use of pirated or sub-standard software and
hardware systems through guidelines and adequate compliance
mechanisms.

Our efforts shall also entail promoting the deployment of standardised
technical security and cryptographic controls, ranging from antivirus,
firewalls and intrusion detection systems, to end-to-end encryption
and multi-factor authentication, amongst others, for security and data
protection across government and private sector systems, especially
those handling sensitive information. Efforts to promote uptake of
security controls amongst general Internet users shall be driven
through regular awareness campaigns, especially the promotion of
security controls for mobile devices.

We are also dedicated to facilitating confidential and trusted data flow
across stakeholders in government as well as the private sector. We
shall therefore continue to encourage appropriate adoption of Public

Key Infrastructure (PKI) to ensure the security of data flow across
54



networks and online activities and services, such as e-government, e-
business and financial transactions. We shall coordinate effective use
and expansion of PKI through robust vetting mechanisms. We shall
also promote mechanisms that assure the integrity of PKI elements
such as certificate authorities, registration authorities, certificate
databases and certificate procedures, amongst others.

Furthermore, we shall develop the necessary mechanism for annual
licensing and registration of cybersecurity training centres and
institutions, Managed Security Service Providers (MSSPs) and cyber
cafes amongst other related services, in line with global best practices.
Our approach is to ensure that all MSSPs, cyber cafes and other
relevant cybersecurity vendors and practitioners are duly registered
and licensed by NCCC to operate in Nigeria. In furtherance to this,
NCCC shall be the sole body to license cybersecurity professionals in
the country.

55



Alignment of
efforts of domestic




CHAPTER 10

ENHANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

Noting the borderless nature of cyberspace, Nigeria would seek
collaboration with other countries to ensure effective implementation
of this strategy. To this end, the country will deepen its relationship
with regional and global partners, set conditions for favourable
outcomes in bilateral and multilateral relations, while also promoting
her regional influence and cybersecurity interests. Combating cyber
terrorism and other forms of cybercrime is important to our national
interest. We recognise that this can be effectively achieved through
bilateral and multilateral collaboration.

Therefore, we will continue to participate in international forums
dedicated to combating cybercrime and addressing cybersecurity. The
NCCC shall serve as our national point of contact for cybersecurity
issues that require urgent assistance from other countries. We
anticipate that our commitment to international partnerships will give
us the best chances of preventing or addressing cyber attacks.
Additionally, we recognise that the security and resilience of our
regional and other international partners is vital to ensuring our
national security and prosperity. Against this backdrop, our strategy
will focus on  coordinating the  responsibilities of domestic
cybersecurity stakeholders within the country to enhance
international engagement, strengthening cybersecurity consensus and
influence on the regional stage and providing support for international
mechanisms that promote cybersecurity.

10.1 COORDINATION FRAMEWORK FOR INTERNATIONAL
ENGAGEMENT

We will align the responsibilities of all stakeholders in government and
the private sector including academia towards  enhancing
cybersecurity collaboration on the international stage. To this end, we
will focus on the development of requisite organisational structures
and protocols for international engagement. This effort shall emanate
from the NCCC as the international focal point and cascade down to
all stakeholders across our cyber ecosystem.

57



This will enable us to clearly harmonise the focus of all key
stakeholders for international cooperation and for cybersecurity
dialogue on the international arena. It will also pave way for
synchronisation of our legal framework with the priorities of the
international community. As part of efforts to support our
coordination framework, we shall facilitate capacity development and
skills acquisition for personnel in the areas of international cyber law
and cyber diplomacy. This effort will also support our drive to promote
mutual trust, confidence, transparency and joint establishment as
well as adoption of international cybersecurity norms. Furthermore, it
will promote multilateral and bilateral partnerships in the areas of
incident response, cybercrime prevention, child online safety, cyber
defence and best practices, amongst others.

10.2 REGIONAL CYBERSECURITY DEVELOPMENT

We shall increase our involvement and influence on cybersecurity
developmental issues in Africa and the West African sub-region. By
this, we will spearhead the creation of new initiatives, forums and
mechanisms to enhance regional cooperation in cybersecurity while
strengthening existing Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and African Union (AU) arrangements and instruments.

We shall also promote capacity development to improve cross-border
law enforcement, judicial and other mechanism of cooperation to
combat cybercrime, promote cross-border knowledge and technology
transfer, support the establishment of regional coordination
frameworks, enhance information sharing on cyber threats and drive
regional cybersecurity market growth. We recognise that these actions
are reliant on our continuous interfacing with relevant regional and
sub-regional cybersecurity establishments.

10.3 INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

Nigeria is committed to strong international cooperation in
cybersecurity as part of our shared responsibility to promote global
economic development and international security. To this end, our
priority is to work closely with other countries and multinational
organisations such as the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) to
garner consensus in cyber law enforcement, threat intelligence

sharing, adoption of collective cyber norms and cybersecurity best
58



practices, policy and strategy formulation and implementation,
technology exchange and capacity development, including cyber
defence.

We will accelerate our efforts to cooperate and combat transnational
cyber threats and cybercrime. We will also further our participation
and influence through dialogue on the global forum, promoting
ratification of  cybersecurity  conventions and  engendering
embracement of the tenets of international cyber laws. Furthermore,
we shall strengthen information sharing with our global partners
through established regional and international arrangements and
mechanisms.

59



Multilateral
Funds and
Grants

NITDEF /

Private
ELA ha
Sustainable
Multi-Channel
Funding for
Implementation
al ”
National Direct
Cybersecurity Federal and

Fand State Support



CHAPTER 11

FUNDING AND SUSTAINABILITY

We recognise the importance of availability of substantial financial
resources to facilitate the actualisation of our national cybersecurity
programme. Our focus is therefore to identify potential sources of
funding relevant to the development of  Nigeria's national
cybersecurity. We also recognise the criticality of assessing the
funding requirement of our proffered cybersecurity activities,
initiatives and programmes while prescribing mechanisms to ensure
availability and sustainability of identified funding streams.

11.1 FUNDING AND SUSTAINABILITY IMPERATIVES

We will adopt a multi-channel funding approach for sustaining and
improving our national cybersecurity program by avoiding over-
reliance on funding from government programs. Therefore, we will
harness relevant financial incentives, fiscal policy, economic and other
funding options that will enhance successful commitment to our
national cybersecurity program. Nigeria shall also continue to sustain
efforts in cybersecurity through the National Cybersecurity Fund
(NCF) mechanism as stipulated in extant laws and regulations, in
addition to other appropriate funding mechanisms. Furthermore, we
shall enhance existing provisions for national cybersecurity funding,
through the following options:

e Provision of institutional fund for the establishment of NCCC

e Provision and prioritisation of national cybersecurity budget
framework

e Reformation and alignment of cybersecurity budget with
implementation assessment

e Empowerment of NCCC to employ appropriate collaborative
funding mechanisms including the remittance of 0.005 levy on
charges of all electronic transaction in line with extant laws

11.1.1 Financial Incentives

We shall develop procedures to incentivise investment in indigenous
cybersecurity related activities such as tax holidays. We shall also set
up Cybersecurity Innovation Grants through public-private sector
equity funding to encourage investment in cybersecurity research,

61



innovation and development of new technologies. Furthermore, we
shall encourage funding for broad base multi-sectoral capacity
development.

11.1.2 Fiscal Policy Initiatives

We shall focus on identifying and selecting targeted cybersecurity
solutions for time-based competition by different categories of
innovators and with support fund to encourage innovation and
development of new technologies. We shall also promote the grant of
pioneer status (tax holidays) to interested cybersecurity investors for
the development and production of cybersecurity related products,
applications and equipment. We will also encourage fiscal policy that
supports development of cybersecurity. To this end, Government shall
explore the following funding options, amongst others:

e National Cybersecurity Program Research, Innovation and
Development will access extra-budgetary funding sources and
leverage extant institutional funds such as NCF, National
Information Technology Development Fund (NITDEF), Universal
Service Provision Fund (USPF) and Tertiary Education Trust
Fund (TETFund)

e Direct federal and state budgetary allocation for cybersecurity
funding — with emphasis on local content solutions

e Facilitation of requisite financial sustainability for NCCC by an
Act of the National Assembly for annual government budgetary
allocation to cater for core capital and recurrent expenditure

+ Encourage private sector organisations to fund the protection of
(people/ecosystem) network endpoints particularly individual
customer endpoints as they enhance the integrity of the core
national network infrastructure.

11.2 MULTILATERAL FUNDING AND GRANTS

We recognise the role of multi-lateral funding for enhancing our

national cybersecurity development. We shall therefore ensure

adequate coordination of the channels and protocols through which

states, organisations and establishments amongst others make

financial and other resources available to Nigeria for implementation

and fulfilment of our national cybersecurity commitments. To this
62



end, NCCC shall be responsible for developing necessary protocols to
guide how stakeholders in the Nigerian cybersecurity ecosystem can
engage with funding bodies, donors and other relative arrangements,
for the acquisition of multilateral funds and grants. Government shall
also continue to facilitate cooperation of state and local governments,
in the area of national cybersecurity funding aspirations, to ensure
adequate harmonisation of efforts of all stakeholders.

63






CHAPTER 12

CONCLUSION

The National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy shall have 5 years life
span with annual performance reporting. Throughout the period, there
shall be continuous policy guidance, monitoring and review of the
implementation plan. The responsibility for effective implementation of
the initiatives lies with every stakeholder across the entire cyber
ecosystem.

Achieving a national cyber security program requires strong
commitment from Government to galvanise the much-needed Specific,
Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Timely (SMART) implementation
of proffered strategic actions. Stakeholders across the private sector
must also exhibit necessary commitment by working closely with
Government within the proffered scope. We recognise that there are
multiple competing considerations within each stakeholder's approach
to addressing cybersecurity. Nonetheless, the responsibility lies on all
stakeholders to ensure concerted, shared and unified efforts towards
realistic implementation of the initiatives proffered in this national
document.

As the country sets out to implement the strategic measures and
unlock national potentials for ensuring progressive use of the nation's
cyberspace, all stakeholders have a mandate to make conscious effort
to balance the security, social and economic imperatives of cyberspace
with the cybersecurity needs of Government, industry, academia and
the international community.

65



APPENDIX

IMPLEMENTATION PLAN

PREAMBLE

We recognise the need to develop a plan for the implementation of our
proffered initiatives, programs and activities, amongst others. Our
implementation plan therefore outlines the details of our express and
implied tasks, deliverables, implementation requirements, timelines
and key performance indicators (KPls) amongst others. It is the
roadmap for driving success, measuring progress and transforming
our prescribed strategic actions into reality.

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

The policy shall mainstream frameworks for measuring accountability
and performance of outlined national cybersecurity initiatives and
programmes. The objective is to ensure continuous monitoring of the
implementation program and to provide assurance that the program
continues to meet stakeholders” expectations within the cybersecurity
ecosystem.

Appropriate mechanisms shall be emplaced for accountability and
performance measurement of the strategy implementation. To this
end, the Cybercrime Advisory Council (CAC) shall establish a National
Steering Committee on Performance Monitoring and Evaluation (NSC-
PME), as a multi-stakeholder steering committee which shall monitor
overall progress and performance and report to the CAC. An annual
performance report on Nigeria's national cybersecurity, in line with the
direction and provisions of the National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy shall be submitted to the CAC by the NSC-PME.
Furthermore, the overall policy direction, relevant approvals and
accountability of all subsequent activities, including the strategy
implementation shall be anchored by the CAC.

Our efforts shall also entail the monitoring and review of cybersecurity
capabilities and level of preparedness of stakeholders at the national,
state, sectoral and private sector levels to ensure continuous
improvement and development of relevant capabilities, skills and
proficiencies. Additionally, we shall continue to conduct information
security audits and process audits for government entities while also

1-1



coordinating and validating security audits and process audits of self-
assessment entities. Our focus will also be directed to the development
of benchmarks for regular statistical data and situational reports on
Nigeria's cybersecurity status.

ACTION PLAN FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION

The objective of the Action Plan for implementing our national
cybersecurity strategy is to articulate our priorities and outline the
direction through which they will be effectively implemented. The
Action Plan outlines our priority activities and highlights the
stakeholders that are entrusted with driving the process towards their
actualisation. All stakeholders are therefore enjoined to utilise the
action plan as a compass to align, focus and consolidate their efforts
towards progressive and successful implementation of our national
cybersecurity strategy.

1-2



ACTION PLAN FOR STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION

PILLAR 1: STRENGTHENING CYBERSECURITY GOVERNANCE AND COORDINATION

Ser | Reference Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Budget Rational KPI
tm) Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) ()
1. | Chapter Establishment and | Development and ONSA (CAC) | Approval of Short Term | Framework for NCCC operational
3.1 Operationalisation | approval of framework framework for establishment of
of the National for the establishment of establishment of NCCC developed Enhanced
Cybersecurity NCCC NCCC and approved governance and
Coordination Physical structure coordination of
Centre (NCCC) Allocation/development | ONSA (CAC) | Funding for Short Term | for NCCC available | Cybersecurity in
of physical structure upgrade of existing Nigeria
and facilities for NCCC infrastructure or Adequate
construction of manpower from Improvement in
Generation of Relevant new facility for relevant agencies — | inclusiveness of all
manpower for NCCC Agencies NCCC Short Term | Jeployed or relevant
seconded to NCCC | stakeholders
Allocation of ONSA (CAC) | Human resources
operational budget for | FMoF and inter-agency Budgetary Stipulated
day-to-day running of engagements for Short Term | Allocation for day- | mandates of NCCC
NCCC NCCC manpower to-day running of | effectively
generation NCCC approved delivered
2. | Chapter Establishment of Design and installation ONSA Funding for design, Short Term | Cybersecurity Improved synergy
3.2 National of a platform for (NCCC) commissioning Dialogue Platform | and enhanced
Cybersecurity secured dialogue and and installation of established information
Dialogue Platform | information sharing FMOCDE the Dialogue sharing across
between all relevant (NITDA Platform across stakeholders
cyber stakeholders NCC) terminals of all

stakeholders

1-3




PILLAR 2: FOSTERING PROTECTION OF CRITICAL NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE

Ser | Reference Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Budget Rational KPI
(6) Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter 4.1 | Identification, Development of Human resources, Short Term | Framework and Improvement in
to 4.5 Designation and framework and technical expertise guidelines for coordination of

Protection of guidelines to and inter-agency identification, activities related

Critical National administer the ONSA (NCCC) | engagements for designation, to CNII protection

Information identification, effective audit,

Infrastructure designation, protection | Relevant coordination of management and

(CNII) and periodic audit of Stakeholders activities related protection of CNII
CNII in the public and to CNII protection developed and
private sectors Security and operational Enhanced

LEAs Human resources, Short Term information

Establishment of technical expertise TISN established | sharing and
Trusted Information TISN and funding for and functional, synergy between
Sharing Network (TISN) technical design, and collaboration | relevant
made up of owners administration and activities stakeholders and
and operators of CNII day-to-day commenced owners/operators
and government functioning of of CNII
stakeholders TISN
Development and ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Medium CNII Protection Effective risk
Execution of CNII Security and inter-agency Term Plan developed mitigation and

Protection Plan

LEAs
FMOCDE
(NITDA, NCC)
Regulatory
Agencies
TISN

engagements and
funding for
development and
implementation of
CNII Protection
Plan

and operational

reduction in scale
and impact of
physical and cyber
attacks on CNII

1-4




Chapter 4.3 | Security of Arrangements to ONSA (NCCC/ | Human resources, Short Term | Internet and Reduction in
to 4.5 Internet and secure the nation's ngCERT) technical telecoms security risks and
Telecoms Internet and Regulatory expertise, tools, gateways secured | attacks on
Gateways telecommunications Agencies, inter-agency Internet and
gateways from, TISN engagements as telecoms
disruption or well as funding for gateways
destruction development of
arrangements to
continually secure
Internet and
telecoms
gateways
Chapter 4.3 | Disaster Recovery | Develop and employ ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Medium Disaster recovery | Enhanced
to 4.5 Plan for CNII effective mechanisms FMOCDE technical facilities, Term mechanisms recovery and
to ensure business (NITDA) inter-agency emplaced seamless
continuity and rapid NEMA engagements as continuity in the
recovery of essential Relevant well as funding for operation of CNII
services from cyber SLEAs development of in the event of
attacks TISN disaster recovery attacks, disaster
Disaster recovery and mechanisms or technical
business continuity failure
mechanisms inspected
as part of CNII audit
Chapter 4.3 | Development of Creation of annual list FMorF (BNP) Inter-agency and Short Term | CNII protection Availability of
to 4.5 Budget for CNII of eligible CNIl under inter-ministerial (Annual) budget requisite funding
Protection protection ONSA (NCCC) | engagements for appropriated for activities

Budget allocation for
protection of
designated CNII in the
public and private
sectors

development,
appropriation and
continuous update
of annual budget
for CNII protection

related to CNII
protection

1-5




PILLAR 3: ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT MANAGEMENT

Ser | Reference | Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Me Rational Outcomes KPI
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter 5.1 | Development of | Development of ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Short to Relevant Sectoral Improved
to 5.6 National frameworks and technical Medium CSIRTs established incident
Cybersecurity regulations for NgCERT expertise, tools, Term and operational detection and
Crisis Response establishment of inter-agency response across
Mechanism CSIRTs Sectoral engagements and ACIS installed and all identified
CSIRTs funding for commissioned sectors of the
Development of establishment of across terminals of | economy
ACIS System for o Regulatory CSIRTs, and all relevant agencies
information sharing Agencies development of Enhanced
on cyber incidents ACIS platform, NCCRP developed information
Development of Relevant NCCRP as well as and executed when sharing and
National Stakeholders | operationalisation required prompt incident
Cybersecurity Crisis of other activities reporting
Response Plan towards enhancing Effective
(NCCRP) cyber crisis response to cyber
response incidents
2. | Chapter 5.4 | National Organise and ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Short Term | Regular cyber drills | Improved synergy
Cybersecurity conduct periodic NgCERT multi-stakeholder (quarterly organised and and enhanced
Readiness exercises and drills | Sectoral engagement, tools drills and executed cybersecurity
Exercises and to assess national CSIRTs and materials as annual readiness,
Drills preparedness Relevant well as funding for exercises) Quarterly protection and
against cyber threat | MDAs planning, conduct evaluation reports incidents
for timely CSIRTS and evaluation of developed with response
mitigation and (Private), cyber exercises lessons learned capabilities
recovery in the Academia, and drills

event of attacks

Industry and
International
Partners

1-6




Chapter 5.5 | Development of | Design and ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources Medium CEMS Improved
Cyber installation of CEMS expertise, inter- Term commissioned and | detection and
Emergency for effective ngCERT agency operational interception of
Monitoring detection and engagement and cyber threats
System (CEMS) interception of Sectoral funding for design,
cyber threats and CSIRTs commissioning Enhanced
associated and installation of information
information sharing | ISPs and IXPs | CEMs across dissemination on
terminals of imminent cyber
ngCERT and CSIRTs threats
Chapter 5.7 | Human Institutionalisation | ONSA (NCCC) | Funding and inter- Medium Human and- Enhanced ability
Resources and of technical ngCERT agency Term technological of ngCERT and
Technological capacity building, Regulatory engagements for (Continuous | capacity developed | CSIRTs to carry
Capacity provision of Agencies human and Annually and sustained out mandate of
Development for | technological Sectoral technological thereafter) cyber incident
ngCERT, Sectoral | capabilities and CSIRTSs, capacity monitoring,
and other CSIRTs | regular system Private Sector | development prevention and
maintenance, CSIRTs Periodic conduct of | response
upgrades and training and
support services provision of routine
Development of technical
training maintenance and
programmes and support services for
provision of support ngCERT and CSIRTS
services facilities
Chapter 5.8 | Establishment of | Establishment of ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Medium NTWG established Improved synergy
National NTWG of multi- multi-stakeholder Term and collaboration and enhanced
Technical stakeholder setup NTWG engagement and activities information
Working Group with representation administration commenced sharing between
(NTWG) for from the requirements for stakeholders
Public Private international day-to-day
Partnership community functioning of
(PPP) NTWG

1-7




Chapter 5.8

Development
and
Implementation
of PPP
Cybersecure
Framework for
Security of
National Digital
Infrastructures

Develop draft PPP
Cybersecure
Framework for
consideration

Develop modalities
for implementation
of approved PPP
Cybersecure
Framework

ONSA (NCCC)

NTWG

Human resources
expertise, inter-
agency
engagement and
funding for
development of
Cybersecure
Framework

Medium
Term

NTWG, in
collaboration with
relevant
stakeholders, to
develop a PPP
Cybersecure
Framework to
assure the security
of the nation's
digital
infrastructures

Continuous
registration and
renewal of licenses
for:

Cybersecurity
Organizations,
Cyber Cafes,
Managed Security
Service Providers,
etc

PPP Cybersecure
Framework
approved and
implementation
activities
commenced

Number of
cybersecurity
organisations and
related entities
registered and
licensed

1-8




PILLAR 4: STRENGTHENING LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

Ser | Reference Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Mel Rational KPI
Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter Amendment of the | Constitute multi- CAC Human resources, Short to Cybercrimes Act Improved
6.1 Cybercrimes stakeholder committee | ONSA multi-stakeholder Medium 2015 amended legislative
(Prohibition, to review the (NCCC) engagement, Term framework for
Prevention Etc) Cybercrimes Act 2015 to | FMOJ materials and administration of
Act 2015 accommodate NASS funding for review cybersecurity in
establishment of NCCC of existing Nigeria
and other areas as listed Cybercrimes Act
in the strategy towards
document development of
Development of draft new cybersecurity
Cybersecurity Act to legislation
cover cybercrime and Inter-agency
other aspects of arrangements for
cybersecurity promulgation of
new cybersecurity
egislation
2. | Chapter Provision of Development of ONSA Human resources, Long Term | Frameworks for Enhanced
6.2 Cybersecurity national data (NCCC) inter-agency National Data security of
Framework for framework for public engagement and Governance and IP | national data
Strengthening service delivery, CAC unding for Protection
National Data research, economy and | FMoCDE development and developed
Governance and security. (NIMC) security of national
Protection of FMoE data framework
Digital Intellectual | Development of NOTAP Technical expertise
Property (IP) measures to ensure the Nigeria and funding for Medium
safeguard of the digital | Copyright development of IP Term
content of intellectual Commission | protection
property NIRA rameworks

1-9




Chapter Harmonization of | Identifying existing laws | ONSA Human resources, Medium Legislative Harmonised
6.2 E-Business related to e-business in | (NCCC) multi-stakeholder Term Framework for provisions across
Legislative Nigeria with a view to FMo) engagement and Online Consumer all identified laws
Framework harmonising them EMOCDE materials for Protection
EMoITI working group to Developed
FCCPC harmonise e-
business laws
Chapter Enactment of Data | Enactment ofa law OSGF Human resources, Short Term | National Data Improvement in
6.2 Protection and regulating the storage, FMoJ multi-stakeholder Protection data protection
Privacy law processing, FMOCDE engagement, Legislative and privacy
transmission and access | (NITDA, materials and Framework
to personal data, which | NIMC -1D4D unding for enacted Reduction in
provides the necessary PSC) development and number of cases
protection against ONSA enactment of of data breaches
unlawful access, usage (NCCC) egislative
and lawful NSS framework
dissemination
Establish an OSGF nter-agency Short Term | Independent Improved
independent and FMOCDE arrangements, national coordination,
effective regulatory (NIMC - human resources, regulator/body administration
authority to coordinate | ID4D PSC) materials and established and and enforcement
data protection and ONSA funding for operational of data
privacy issues in Nigeria | (NCCC) establishment of protection
Develop Guidelines for regulatory Guidelines related activities
: authority and developed and
Data protection
development of enforced

procedures to include
steps to be taken for
customer consent,
record retention, secure
data disposal,
international data
transfer and complaint
handling

data protection
guidelines




Chapter Establishment of Establish technology ONSA(NCCC) | Technical Medium to | Technology Reduction in
6.3 Mechanism for platform/mechanism expertise, training, Long Term | platform/ Child Abuse
Filtering and involving ngCERT/ FMoJ human resources, mechanism Materials (CAM)
Preventing the Internet Providers, FMoOCDE tools, multi- deployed and on the Internet
Spread of Online Content Operators for (NITDA, stakeholder operational and social media
Child Abuse reporting and removing | NCC) engagement and in Nigeria's
Materials (CAM) or blocking access to FMoST funding for cyberspace
and Prosecution of | ¡illegal content or CAM LEAs development and
Suspects within NGOs operationalisation
Nigeria's of mechanisms to
Jurisdiction combat CAM
Chapter Launching of Constitution of Law ONSA Programmes, Medium Awareness Sustained
6.3 National Child Enforcement Task Force | (NCCC) inter-agency Term campaign channels for
Online Safety on Child Online FMoJ engagements, (Annually) | launched and improving
Awareness Protection FMoE human resources sustained sensitization and
Campaign and Development of FMoWASD and funding for Task force mechanism for
other related programs and activities NITDA constitution and established combating online
initiatives to promote awareness LEAs operationalisation child exploitation
and education on child | NOA of Task Force and National register and abuse
online safety NGOs launching of created Reduction in
Creation of National o ud Cases of abuse number of cases
Register of Convicted - reduced of online child
Offenders online safety exploitation
Chapter Launching of Development of multi- ONSA Programmes, Medium Mechanisms to Reduction in
6.4 Online Safety stakeholder forum to (NCCC) inter-agency Term combat online number of cases
Awareness and drive online gender FMoJ engagements, (Annually) | gender of online
Education for protection and creation | FMoE human resources exploitation exploitation of
Women and of opportunities to FMoWASD and funding for developed women
Breaking Barriers improve the FMOoCDE running activities Initiatives to drive !
to Digital Gender participation of women | (NITDA) to enhance women Increase in the
Gap in cybersecurity LEAs women online empowerment number of
activities and NOA safety and created women engaged
engagements NGOs promote digital in cybersecurity

gender equality

1-11




Chapter Capacity Building Strengthening ONSA Technical Medium Training program, | Capacity building
6.5 for Law Cybersecurity capacity (NCCC) expertise, training, Term Seminars, for Judges and
Enforcement and building for the judicial human resources, (Recurrent) | Workshops and lawyers on
Judiciary officers, legal FMoJ tools, multi- Conferences cybercrime laws -
practitioners and law LEAs stakeholder organised and Minimum of 50
enforcement officers NCTI engagement and conducted judges and 200
NGOs funding for lawyers per
capacity annum
development
Capacity building
for prosecutors
and law
enforcement
agencies on
digital forensics,
cybercrime
investigation and
prosecution -
minimum of 500
per annum
Chapter Establishment ofa | Develop and implement | ONSA Human resources Medium Establishment ofa | Improvement in
6.6 Specialised modalities for the (NCCC) and expertise for Term division at the ability of courts
Division for establishment of a establishment and Federal High Court | to handle digital
Cybercrime division that will have FMoJ operationalisation on cybersecurity evidence and
Related Cases in the mandate to CJ of the of specialised and related successfully
the Federal High adjudicate exclusively Federal High | division matters prosecute
Court on cybersecurity and Court cybercriminals

related cases




10.

Chapter
6.6

Development of
Digital Forensics
Capacity and
Provision of
Regulatory
Oversight
Functions

Establish a National
Framework for the
regulation, certification,
technical support and
collaboration of digital
forensic laboratories
across the country

Develop modalities for
human and
technological capacity
development for
National Digital Forensic
Laboratory

ONSA
(NCCC)

LEAs

Human resources,
funding and inter-
agency
engagements for
human and
technological
capacity
development for
digital forensic
laboratories

Medium
Term
(Continuous
Annually
thereafter)

Framework
developed and
implemented

Human and-
technological
capacity developed
and sustained

Periodic conduct
of training and
provision of
routine technical
maintenance and
support services
for laboratories

Number of
successful digital
forensics
investigations




PILLAR 5: ENHANCING CYBER DEFENCE CAPABILITY

Ser | Reference Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Budget Rational KPI
(m) Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter Establishment and | Setting up of Defence MoD (DSA) Technical Short Term | Defence CSIRT Operational
7.1 Operationalisation | CSIRT and SOC to expertise, training, operational to Defence SOC
of Defence monitor and protect ONSA (NCCC) human resources, Interface with with agile
Computer Security | the Nigerian tools, hardware ngCERT and other | Defence CSIRT
Incident Response | cyberspace and FMOST(NASRDA) | and software Sectoral CSIRTs
Team (CSIRT) and | respond in event of systems, multi- for cyber incident | Number of
Security escalating cyber-attack | Sectoral CSIRTs | stakeholder management, successful
Operations Centre engagement and technology and cyber drills and
(SOC) funding for skills transfer and | exercises
establishment and joint conduct of
operationalisation drills and Number of
of CSIRT/SOC exercises successful
cyber attacks
prevented
2. | Chapter Development of Development of NCDP | MoD (DSA) Human resources, Medium NCDP formulated | Effective
7.2 National Cyber outlining arrangements technical Term and operational response to
Defence Plan for protection of the ONSA (NCCC) expertise, inter- (Continuous national cyber
(NCDP) Nigerian cyberspace in | FMOST(NASRDA) | agency Thereafter) attacks on CNII
the event of escalated | Relevant engagements and and impact
national cyber-attack Stakeholders funding for prevention

development and
implementation of
NCDP




Chapter
7.3

Human Resources
and Technological
Capacity
Development for
Defence CSIRT

Institutionalisation of
technical capacity
building, provision of
technological
capabilities and regular
system maintenance,
Upgrades and support
services

MOD (DSA)

ONSA (NCCC)

Funding, tools and
inter-agency
engagements for
human and
technological
capacity
development

Medium
Term
(Continuous
Annually
thereafter)

Human and-
technological
capacity
developed and
sustained

Periodic conduct
of training and
provision of
routine technical
maintenance and
support services
for Defence CSIRT
facilities

Enhanced
ability of
Defence CSIRT
to carry out
mandate of
cyber defence

Reduction in
the number of
successful
cyber attacks
and increase in
the number of
quelled cyber
attacks




PILLAR 6: PROMOTING A THRIVING DIGITAL ECONOMY

Ser | Reference | Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Me Rational KPI
Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter Activities to Develop programs and | ONSA (NCCC) | Human resources, Medium Periodic training Number of training
8.1 Develop activities to promote technical Term programmes for programmes
Responsible the confidence and use | FMoCDE expertise, tools (Continuous | government conducted by
Cybersecurity of e-government, (NITDA, NCC) | and systems, Annually employees government
Culture and e-business and FMol8:C(NBC) | trainings, inter- thereafter) conducted agencies
Behaviour to e-transactions NOA agency
Engender a Safe platforms in the NGOs engagements and Mechanisms Online protection
and Trusted Nigerian cyberspace funding for launch delivered for measures
Internet and Private of activities to service providers implemented by
Digital Conduct of activities to | Sector promote and other private sector
Environment ensure that individuals cybersecurity operators of service providers
and organisations are culture online digital

aware of their
responsibilities within
the cyberspace

services to protect
online platforms

Provision of free
publicly available
materials on
online safety for
users of the
Internet among
the general public
and conduct of
surveys

General
improvement in
safety and
confidence of
online
environment




Chapter
8.2

Cybersecurity
Human Resources
and Workforce
Development

Development, FMOE (NUC, Funding, tools and Long Term Developed Rate of enrolment
promotion and NBTE, UBEC) | multi-stakeholder (Continuous | curriculum for and successful
accreditation of engagements for Annually Cybersecurity completion of
cybersecurity courses/ | FMoCDE human resources thereafter) o quality
curriculum in academic | (NITDA, NCC) | and workforce Adequate training cybersecurity
institutions capacity materials and education in
development resources universities and

Integrate cybersecurity | ONSA (NCCC) Capacity other educational
awareness efforts into development of institutions
ICT courses at the cybersecurity
school, academic and academic teachers
vocational levels

Framework to

incentivise skills

and talents in

cybersecurity such

as award of grants

to institutions for

cybersecurity

research and

traineeship in

cybersecurity
Establish National ONSA (NCCC, | Funding, tools and Long Term NCTI established Number of
Cybersecurity Training | NCTI) multi-stakeholder (Continuous certified
Institute (NCTI) engagements for Annually cybersecurity
Skills acquisition and Relevant professional thereafter) Standardised professionals in
professional Stakeholders | development certification the private sector
development in courses created and Government
cybersecurity
Research and FMoE Funding, tools and Long Term Roadmap to Number of
Development (R8.D) in | Academia multi-stakeholder harness successful quality
Cybersecurity and Industry | engagements for cybersecurity RED | cybersecurity RED

ONSA (NCCC) | research and efforts developed | projects

development




Chapter Indigenous Development of FMST Technical Long Term Establishment of Increase in
8.3 Cybersecurity competitive indigenous | (NOTAP) expertise, multi- (Continuous | cybersecurity number of quality
Technology cybersecurity products | FMoCDE stakeholder thereafter) technology indigenous
Development and services in the (NITDA) engagement, innovation centres | cybersecurity
market FMOoE (NUC) | funding and and laboratories software and
Academia €: organisations to in institutions of hardware
Funding of Industry drive indigenous learning and deployed
cybersecurity RED ONSA (NCCC) | technology industry
projects TETFund development
NGOs
Chapter Development ofa | Promotion of cyber NAICOM Human resources, Long Term Increased Increase in cyber
8.3 Cyber Insurance insurance products and | ONSA(NCCC) | multi-stakeholder coverage for risks | liability coverage
Sector services engagement, associated with
technical cyber incidents
Alleviating potential expertise, funding
consequences of cyber and training to
incidents develop cyber
insurance sector
Chapter Cybersecurity Develop Cybersecurity | NOA Human resources, Short Term Cybersecurity Awareness in Local
8.4 Awareness and Awareness programs in technical (Continuous) | Information Portal | Languages
Sensitisation Local Languages ONSA (NCCC) | expertise, tools launched
Campaign and systems, Awareness Number of NCAM
Encourage the National | FMoCDE trainings, inter- Activities on activities
Cybersecurity LEAs agency Cybersecurity
Awareness Month NGOs engagements and commenced General
(NCAM) NAN funding for launch improvement in
NIRA of sensitisation Private Sector cybersecurity
Private Sector ATCON campaign Awareness Forum | awareness through
Partnership for CSEAN created conduct of surveys
Awareness and ISPAN Forum created for
Capacity Building CPN cybersecurity
NCS

professionals
including the ones
in Diaspora




Chapter Mechanisms to Adoption of FMoF (CBN, Human resources, Medium Strengthening Risk Management
8.5 Mitigate Risks mechanisms to drive NFIU) technical Term frameworks for Framework for
Associated with progressive use of ONSA (NCCC) expertise, tools managing virtual Virtual Assets
Virtual Assets virtual currencies while and systems, inter- assets Developed
addressing associated Other agency Driving
risks relevant engagement and bona
stakeholders | funding for risk sensitization and
O Collaboration on
mitigation Virtual Assets
measures
Chapter Protection of Identification and ONSA (NCCC) | Technical Long Term Integrated threat | Mitigating financial
8.5 Digital Economic protection of FINTECH, | FMoF (BNP, expertise, tools intelligent System | crime and
Infrastructure innovation sectors and | CBN) and systems, for the financial improved
financial platforms FMOCDE multi-stakeholder industry resilience of
NDIC engagement, FINTECH products
NBC human resources,
(Banking training and
Sector) funding to
NFIU emplace activities
SEC to protect digital

economic
infrastructure




PILLAR 7: ASSURANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Ser | Reference | Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Ml Rational KPI
Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (a) (e) (£) (g) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter Development and | Design and adoption of | FMoCDE Human resources, Medium Cybersecurity Reduction in use of
9.1 Adherence to technical standards (NITDA) training, tools and Term Technical sub-standard
Cybersecurity and good practices systems, inter- Standards and software and
Technology . Regulatory agency Good Practices systems
Mechanism to ensure : an
Standards . Agencies engagements and Guidelines
adherence to technical :
tandards and d funding for developed Number of
stan ar sand 800 ONSA (NCCC) | development and a successful audits
practices Activities launched
enforcement of to publicise and conducted
Periodic audit of CNII, standards as well P
' promote
and Government and as capacity ideli
private sector ICT and building for guldelines
cybersecurity system compliance Interface with
Capacity building for officers global partners to
: ensure alignment
auditors and A :
: . with international
compliance officers
standards
2. | Chapter Improvement of Enhancement of FMOCDE Technical Medium Audit on Quality of
9.2 Cybersecurity quality of cybersecurity | (NITDA) expertise, tools, Term procurement, cybersecurity
Quality Control systems deployed for inter-agency (Continuous | deployment and software and
and Security government Regulatory engagements and Thereafter) | development of technical systems
Processes operations, businesses, | Agencies funding for technology enhanced based
commercial and promotion of systems on feedback and
financial services ONSA (NCCC) | quality control and Quality antivirus, audit reports
Promotion of security processes 1DS, IPS, E2E
standardised technical encryption,
security and multifactor

cryptographic controls

authentication etc

1-20




Chapter
9.2

Coordinate and
secure effective
use and expansion
of Public Key
Infrastructure
(PKI) through
robust vetting

Development of
National
Framework for
Cybersecurity
Regulations and
Compliance

Certification of
registration authorities

Ensure management
system and policy of
central directories

Develop modalities to
ensure conformity and
enforcement of
national cybersecurity
regulation standards
and guidelines of PKI
value chain

FMOoCDE
(NITDA,NIMC,
Galaxy
Backbone)

ONSA (NCCC)

Technical
expertise, tools,
inter-agency
engagements and
funding for
development and
enforcement of
guidelines for PKI

Medium
Term

Long Term

A trustworthy
digital
communication
and transaction
environment

Framework for
Cybersecurity
regulations and
compliance
developed and
enforced

Developed
framework for
cybersecurity
regulations and
compliance

1-21




PILLAR 8: ENHANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

Ser | Reference || Express/Implied Further Actions Responsible Implementation | Estimated | Timeframe? Performance Metrics
Task Required Agency Requirements Budget Rational KPI
tm) Outcomes
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (£) (8) (h) (i) (i)
1. | Chapter Capacity Development of FMoJ Funding, tools, Medium Training Number of trained
10.1 Development in capacity to harmonise FMoFA expertise and Term programmes and professionals in
International the responsibilities of NIIA multi-stakeholder (Continuous | related activities cyber diplomacy
Cyber Law and stakeholders across ONSA engagements for Thereafter) | on cyber and international
Cyber Diplomacy government, academia | (NCCC) capacity diplomacy and cyber law
and industry for development in international cyber Improvements in
enhanced regional and cyber law and law launched dialogue and
international diplomacy discussions on the
engagement global stage
2. | Chapter Cross Border Development of FMoJ Multilateral Medium Improved Increase in
6.7 and Cybersecurity Law | mechanisms to FMoFA engagement, Term collaboration successful number
Chapter Enforcement to enhance bilateral and ONSA technical (Continuous | between law of cross-border
10.2 Combat multi-lateral (NCCC) expertise, human Thereafter) | enforcement and processing of
Cybercrime collaboration towards SLEAs resources, training judiciary for cross- | cybercrime cases
combating cybercrime and funding to border
develop capacity investigation,
and drive synergy prosecution and
transfer of digital
evidence
3. | Chapter International Review membership of | FMoFA Multilateral Long Term Enhanced Improved
10.3 cooperation recognised FMoJ engagement, International participation in
International bodies ONSA expertise, training Cooperation global
Facilitate cybersecurity | (NCCC) and funding to cybersecurity
cooperation among NIIA enhance activities, dialogue,
stakeholders, international programs and
international bodies synergy initiatives

1-22




Chapter
10.3

Acceding to
International
Cybersecurity
Conventions

International
cooperation
mechanisms to
enhance synergy in
global cybersecurity
concerns and improve
access to technical
support, influence and
outreach

ONSA(NCCC)
FMoJ
FMoFA

Expertise, multi-
stakeholder
engagements and
multilateral
engagements to
enhance
consultation
towards endorsing
identified
cybersecurity
conventions

Medium
Term

Consultation and
accession to
International
Conventions on
Cybercrime and
other multi-lateral
instruments

international
conventions
endorsed

IRelevant stakeholders ar
requirements would be sub:

ject to validation by t

e to develop budgetary requirements for implementation of express/implied tasks. Budgetary
he Cybercrime Advisory Council (CAC).

2Short Term (First and Second Quarter 2021), Medium Term (Third 2021 to Second Quarter 2022) Long Term (Third Quarter
2022 - Fourth Quarter 2025)

1-23




FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
POLICY AND STRATEGY 2021
Summary

VISION MISSION

A safe and secure digital community that

provides opportunities for its citize d optimise:

promotes peaceful and proact Ú and coordination capa

engagements in cyberspace for enhanced  addressing the nation's cyber risk exposure
national prosperity

The National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy 2021 is a purposeful and living document
which outlines the roadmap for realisation of our cybersecurity Vision and Mission. The
document is a confluence of ends, ways and means which articulates the efforts of all
stakeholders and emplaces our National Cybersecurity Programme on 8 critical pillars

Enhancing Cyber
Defence Capability

Strengthening Cybersecurity
Governance and Coordination

Promoting a Thriving
Digital Economy

8 Pillars
to form the
support for our
national
cybersecurity
program

Enhancing Cybersecurity Le .
Incident Management

Strengthening Legal and el
Regulatory Framework VLO

(65 Enhancing International
5) Cooperation

In line with the provisions of Section 41 of the Cybercrimes
(Prohibition, Prevention, Etc) Act 2015 which empowers the
Office of the National Security Adviser to be the coordinating
body for national cybersecurity, the National Cybersecurity
Coordination Centre (NCCC) is entrusted with the responsibility

of aligning and harmonising the efforts of all stakeholders
towards the delivery of our National Cybersecurity Programme




To deliver the objectives of our National Cybersecurity Programme, we have an
Implementation Plan that is our roadmap for driving success, measuring progress and
transforming our prescribed strategic actions into reality. The key actions are:

+ Establishment of National Cybersecurity
Coordination Centre

+ Driving Awareness of Cybersecurity
Stakeholders' Responsibilities

+ Coordination of national cybersecurity
incident management
+ Establishment of Sectoral CSIRTs

« National Crisis Response Plan

+ Administering the activities of the cyber
establishments of the armed forces and
law enforcement agencies

+ Development of a cyber defence plan for
Nigeria

+ Training of the armed forces to protect the
Nigerian cyberspace

+ Deployment of robust and high-quality
cybersecurity technology to safeguard our
cyberspace

+ Strengthening Standards and Good
Practices in Public and Private Sectors

+ Deployment of Quality Controls and
Security Processes

+ Comprehensive approach to CNIl
Protection and Resilience

+ Identifying and Coordinating CNI Sectors

and Dependencies

* Developing CNII Protection Plan

+ Review and harmonisation of existing legal
framework on cybersecurity (including e-
business and online consumer protection).

+ Internet Safety and Protection of Children
and Gender Rights Online

+ Developing the capacity of the judiciary
and law enforcement to address
cybercrime

+ Promoting the use of the cyberspace to
drive Nigeria's digital economy

+ Building trust and confidence in a safe
and resilient Nigerian cyberspace

* Promoting an indigenous cyber workforce

+ Driving a high level of awareness on
cybersecurity

CIMESS

+ Alignment of efforts of domestic
cybersecurity stakeholders within Nigeria
to enhance international engagement

+ Strengthening cybersecurity influence on
the regional stage

+ Providing support for international
mechanisms that promote cybersecurity

As the country sets out to implement the strategic measures and unlock national potentials for
ensuring progressive use of the nation's cyberspace, all stakeholders have a mandate to make
conscious effort to balance the security, social and economic imperatives of cyberspace with
the cybersecurity needs of government, industry, academia and the international community.







