 
 
1 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 
 
 
DRAFT NATIONAL 
CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST | 2021 
 
 
 

 
 
2 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
Document status 
Draft ready for stakeholder consultation 
X 
For approval after incorporation of stakeholder comments 
 
Approved 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Table of Contents 
GLOSSARY .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
FOREWORD ........................................................................................................................................ 5 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................ 6 
1 
VISION AND GOALS ..................................................................................................................... 7 
1.2 Vision and mission ..................................................................................................................... 7 
1.3 Goals ........................................................................................................................................ 7 
2. CURRENT SITUATION, NATIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT AND TRENDS .......................................... 9 
2.1 Alignment with Other Strategies ................................................................................................. 9 
2.2 Digital Transformation of Economy ........................................................................................... 10 
2.3 Cyber Crime ............................................................................................................................ 12 
2.4 Protection of Critical Infrastructure ........................................................................................... 13 
2.5 Digital Awareness .................................................................................................................... 14 
2.6 Uganda’s Performance on Global Indices ................................................................................... 15 
3. STRATEGIC TASKS ........................................................................................................................ 17 
3.1 Safe and trusted digital economy .............................................................................................. 17 
3.2 Threat preparedness and response ........................................................................................... 19 
3.3 Robust cybersecurity ecosystem ............................................................................................... 22 
3.4 Cyber Skilled Uganda ............................................................................................................... 25 
3.5 Active and reliable partner of international community ............................................................... 28 
3.6 Provide enabling governance framework ................................................................................... 31 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN ................................................................................................................... 34 
 
  
 
 

 
 
4 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
Acronym 
Explanation 
3i 
Inclusive Internet Index 
4IR 
4th Industrial Revolutions 
AFRIPOL 
African Union Mechanism for Police Cooperation 
APSA 
African Peace and Security Architecture 
AU 
African Union 
AUCSEG 
African Union Cybersecurity Expert Group 
CCI 
Commonwealth Cybercrime Initiative 
CERT 
Computer Emergency Response Team 
CERT.UG/CC Uganda National Computer Emergency Response Team / Coordination Centre 
CI 
Critical Infrastructure 
CISO 
Chief Information Security Officer  
CSIRT 
Computer Security Incident Response Team 
EDGI 
E-Government Development Index 
FIRST 
Forum of Incident Response Team 
GDP 
Gross Domestik Product 
GFGE 
Global Forum on Cybersecurity Experts 
GGE 
Group of Government Experts 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
GoU 
Government of Uganda 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IDI 
ICT Developement Index 
INTERPOL 
International Criminal Police Organization 
ITU 
International Telecommunications Union  
MDAs 
Ministries, departments and agencies 
MoES 
Ministry of Education and Sport 
MoICT & NG 
Ministry of ICT and National Guidance 
MoJCA 
Ministry of Justice & Constitutional Affairs  
MSME 
Micro, small and medium enterprises 
NCII 
National Critical Information Infrastructure 
NCDC 
National Curriculum Development Centre 
NCS 
National Cybersecurity Strategy 2016 (draft) 
NIISP 
National ICT Initiatives Support Program 
NISAG 
National Information Security Advisory Group 
NISF 
National Information Security Framework 
NISS 
National Information Security Strategy 
NITA-U 
National Information Technology Authority, Uganda 
PKI 
Public Key Infrastructure 
PPP 
Public-Private Partnerships 
R&D 
Research and development 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals  
UCC 
Uganda Communications Commission 
UG.CERT 
Computer Emergency Response Team of the communication sector 
UGX 
Ugandan Schilling 
UN 
United Nations 
UNBS 
Ugandan National Bureau of Standards 
UNCHE 
Uganda National Council for Higher Education 
UPF 
Uganda Police Force 
WB 
World Bank 

 
 
5 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
FOREWORD 
The Information and Communications Technology (ICT) domain is now part of our core fundamental areas 
that have been identified to spur Uganda’s socio-economic development as enshrined within the National 
Vision 2040. Today, ICT is one of the leading drivers for social-economic growth globally.  
 
The Aspiration of the Government of Uganda is to support Uganda’s economic competitiveness growth 
enabled by ICT. Embedded within, is to achieve a state of harmonized and interoperable digital 
infrastructure for Government of Uganda as our strategic goal through building the appropriate secure ICT 
Infrastructure, creating an enabling environment as well as developing and promoting use of e-Government 
for efficient service delivery. Over the years, the private sector has made similar investments towards 
incorporation of ICT within their various business models. 
 
Pillar three of the Digital Uganda Vision (2020) addresses ‘Cyber Security and Data Privacy’. This pillar 
provides assurance that digital services are safe, secure, protected, and trusted and when in use. This pillar 
further seeks to ensure that the country builds capacity for cybersecurity management.  
 
In line with this, the information and processes held on this digital infrastructure is critical to the well-
functioning of the country. The more we increase our adoption and investment in ICT, the more we increase 
our risk exposure. This therefore necessitates we adopt cyber security as a culture in our usage of ICT 
based on the principles of confidentiality, integrity and availability. 
 
Currently, the threat towards digital infrastructure and applications is not only eminent but more 
sophisticated, persistent and disastrous. With this in mind, countries are increasing improving their cyber 
security focus to protect their digital infrastructure as well as defend against cyber-attacks. At the national 
level, Government of Uganda has led several cyber security initiatives aimed towards improving Uganda’s 
information security maturity level.  
 
In light of the above, the complex and interconnected nature of the cyber space is such that ensuring 
holistic cyber security becomes a shared responsibility between the Government, Private Sector and other 
stakeholders. Part of our country’s national critical information infrastructure is run by the private sector. A 
resilient National approach towards Cyber Security requires the involvement of all key stakeholders (both 
state and non-state actors), whether at national and international level based on collaboration, which is 
the intent of this strategy.  The development of this strategy has been a collaborative initiative within the 
public and private ICT sub sector stakeholders. 
 
The National Cyber Security Strategy sets the direction for improvement of our National Cyber Security 
capabilities to achieve the highest cyber security maturity level. As we implement this strategy, we will be 
promoting trust amongst our citizens in the usage of ICT enabled services, defending our digital 
infrastructure against threats as well as contributing to international cyber security. The Strategy further 
demonstrates our commitment to ensuring that our adoption of ICT supports the country’s improved 
competitiveness.  
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
Hon. Dr. Chris Baryomunsi 
Minister for ICT & National Guidance 
 
 

 
 
6 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Over the years, the Government of Uganda has placed the requisite enabling environment to facilitate the 
growth of the information and communication technologies (ICT) sector. Uganda has invested in a national 
fibre-optic backbone to promote social and economic development by availing cost effective, reliable and 
high-speed connectivity to the businesses and citizens. In the last ten years, Uganda's ICT sector has grown 
at an exponential rate, owing largely to a favorable policy and legal climate that has resulted in increased 
investment, expansion of ICT infrastructure, innovation, and expansion of ICT products and services. The 
potential for the total transformation of the economy and the attendant social impact is best demonstrated 
by the pervasive expansion and use of mobile money services in Uganda. Mobile money transactions 
facilitated via telecommunication company platforms more than [1] doubled in value to US $26 billion in 
2020, from $9 billion in 2015 [2]. The recent Uganda National Development Plan for 2020/21 – 2024/25, 
that stipulates the Country’s medium term strategic direction, development priorities and implementation 
strategies in line with the Uganda Vision 2040, sets the digital transformation, ie the usage of ICT services 
for social and economic development as one of the 18 core programs of the strategy.   
 
At the same time, peace, security and defence are prerequisites for a sustainable socio-economic 
transformation, democracy and national unity. The growth in the ICT infrastructure, Internet usage and 
online access have opened new opportunities for the country, however, with the increase in use of e-
services, the need for cybersecurity protection is key in order to avoid cyber fraud and maintain trust in 
the use of these services. Information security also serves broader national security goals by protecting 
critical national sectors and information infrastructure.  
 
Security in cyberspace is especially important to realize the strategic visions of Uganda. This Cybersecurity 
Strategy 2021 provides development paths, policy and technical recommendations to achieve Uganda’s 
Vision 2040 aiming to transform Uganda to a competitive upper middle income country. Uganda has taken 
important steps to put in place and implement in practice the necessary policy, legal and regulatory 
frameworks in order to take advantage of the growing digital economy, but also to protect its critical 
national infrastructure and citizens, by ensuring a safe and secure space that will help the society to have 
trust and confidence in the digital economy. 
 
The Cybersecurity Strategy 2021 is a strategic planning tool that reflects Uganda’s plans to achieve the 
objectives of modern economies. The strategy contributes to existing policies that seek to implement 
Uganda’s socio-economic development from cybersecurity perspective and aspires to support building a 
digital environment that citizens and businesses can trust. 
 
The Strategy document is structured into four main chapters. First, after introduction the vision, mission 
and goals for Uganda are set for the next years in the cybersecurity domain. Next, the Strategy describes 
the context of today’s trends in digital development and Uganda’s strategic advances, but also cyber threats 
and trends in cybercrime, and the national capacity to address these. The essence of the Cybersecurity 
Strategy 2021 is in Chapter 5 that describes the main principles, strategic direction, pillars and targets in 6 
areas. The last Chapter covers implementation mechanism as well as monitoring and evaluation of the 
strategy. 
 
The Strategy was developed through a consultative process led by the Ministry of ICT and National 
Guidance.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
1   VISION AND GOALS 
 
1.2 Vision and mission 
 
Vision: Uganda is a Digitally Empowered Society and Knowledge Economy.  
 
Mission: To create a 
 ensuring a secure and resilient cyberspace that 
supports the adoption and innovation of ICT in all sectors for the socio-economic stability and development 
of Uganda.  
 
1.3 Goals 
 
Digitalization is an important process that supports Uganda’s economic development, national welfare, and 
prosperity. Our goal is to have ICTs incorporated into every aspect of the everyday lives of people, 
organisations, business and government. The national cybersecurity system established by this Strategy 
aims to support fostering safe and trusted digital economy of Uganda to ensure safety of e-services and 
reduce cybercrime. The strategy set strategic goals in 6 areas. 
 
 
 
Following the whole-of-nation principle  
The protection of Uganda and its citizens in cyberspace is a shared responsibility – everyone has a role to 
play. The COVID crisis has shown the importance of secure online connectivity as it is forcing anything 
which can be digitized, to digitize and many organisations have had to embrace remote working. The 
whole-of-nation principle calls for citizens, private sector companies, and government agencies to work 
hand-in-hand to seize the various possibilities of digital technology while managing cyber risks.  
 
The Government of Uganda is putting in place the necessary infrastructure and policies to build capabilities, 
and to create a conducive ecosystem for the Digitally Empowered Society and Knowledge Economy of 
Uganda as set in the Digital Uganda Vision. In addition, the Government is conducive ecosystem to foster 
Uganda’s cybersecurity by developing and enforcing policies and guidelines. However, both companies and 
community as important stakeholders shall do their part and follow national cybersecurity guidelines and 
policies set by the Government. 
 

 
 
8 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
2. CURRENT SITUATION, 
NATIONAL CAPACITY 
ASSESSMENT AND TRENDS 
E-Services and the widening use of ICT are the lifeblood of the digital economy globally. Over the last two 
decades, the number of e-Services globally has accelerated exponentially, helping to connect industry, 
facilitate trade, and drive international investment. E-Services have also impacted environmental and social 
practices and transformed the delivery of government services.  
 
Uganda Vision 2040 aims at “a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous 
country within 30 years”. As a developing country, Uganda has a unique opportunity to boost economy, 
public administration, education, and healthcare with digitalisation. Without outdated legacy systems it is 
possible to focus on new opportunities in technology and e-services. Digital transformation also positions 
Uganda among regional and global leaders in the field of digital agile governance by focusing on effective 
service delivery, citizen engagement and the digital economy. This will reduce the cost of governance and 
reduce corruption while increasing national productivity. 
 
The potential for the total transformation of the economy and the attendant social impact is best 
demonstrated by the pervasive expansion and use of mobile money services in Uganda. Mobile money 
transactions facilitated via telecommunication company platforms more than doubled in value to US$ 20 
billion in 2019, from $9 billion in 2015, according to the Bank of Uganda. Further design and implementation 
of specific sector-wide digitalization projects can assist faster and more profound digital transformation.  
 
Transformation of Uganda to modern society will rely on a modern education system but also on high 
awareness and safe behavior while using ICTs. Uganda focuses on building a digitally enabled society that 
is agile and able to adapt to emerging technologies and trends. It also looks at promotion of digital literacy 
and ICT professional development for the current and future industry needs.  
 
Cybersecurity is the a cross-cutting theme to support the digital economy and transformation. Therefore, 
it is important to develop also a robust and solid Cybersecurity Strategy that establishes measures to ensure 
security of digitalisation process and help to protect Uganda and its citizens in cyberspace. The strategic 
tasks described in the Cybersecurity Strategy will give assurance that digital services are and will remain 
safe, secure, protected, and trusted.  
 
2.1 Alignment with Other Strategies 
Uganda has established quite a solid set of strategic perspectives, with the wider aspiration to support 
Uganda’s economic competitiveness and growth enabled by ICT. Series of policies, strategies, and 
legislation provide the road map guiding country to becoming an information society and digital economy 
and set the guiding principles and direction for the Cybersecurity Strategy 2021. 
 
Uganda Vision 2040 emphasizes the importance of digital transformation in Ugandan society and 
underscores the need for Uganda to re-orient itself to make ICT as the main driver of economic growth. 
Digital Uganda Vision of the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance provides an overarching framework 
that responds to the national Vision 2040 by providing a unified ICT policy direction and strategic framework 
to show how ICT can empower Ugandan citizens and achieve the goals of universal inclusion, sustainable 
development, economic progress and poverty eradication through digital innovation. Digital Uganda Vision 
acknowledges that the ICT potential by different stakeholders is very much premised on the ability to 
ensure security of information, privacy and protection of personal data. Therefore, the Vision provides 
strategic inventions to build a trusted digital ecosystem in Uganda. The 4th Industrial Revolutions 

 
 
10 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Strategy’s (4IR) vision is to transform Uganda to a continental 4IR hub by 2040 and accelerate Uganda’s 
development into an innovative, productive and competitive society using 4IR technologies. One of the 
strategic objectives is to support national security in the digital world.  
 
Given the immense advantages of connecting the population to the internet and to mobile networks,  
both universal broadband access and complete mobile coverage nationally are national priority in terms of 
infrastructure. Uganda Broadband Policy 2020 recognizes the broadband infrastructure as a public 
utility (like water, transport and energy) and sets the target to provide connectivity for all, improve its 
affordability and licensing conditions.  
 
At the same time, peace, security and defence are prerequisites for a sustainable socio-economic 
transformation, democracy and national unity as stated in the Uganda Vision 2040. Security in cyberspace 
is especially important to realize the goals set in the Digital Uganda Vision. Protection of the country’s 
sovereignty is now the next frontier and Uganda needs the enhanced the capabilities and resources, both 
human and technological, to build adequate and credible defence capacity to address external threats and 
maintain internal security. Third National Development Plan 2020/21 – 2024/25 acknowledges that 
cyberspace is now a medium for disinformation among competing commercial interests, ideological 
adversaries, governments, and extremists, and it is a battleground between cybercriminals and law 
enforcement. The Plan emphasizes Uganda’s need to significantly invest in building the competencies of 
communication structures to be able to anticipate, avert and stop disrupting attempts of government or 
commercial operations and minimize the spread of misinformation. Government is willing to react and enact 
regulation of cyberspace, increase resources for cyber-defence and protect the critical infrastructure (e.g. 
power grids) from cyber threats.  
 
Uganda’s preparation of its second National Development Plan coincided with the endorsement of the UN 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015. Consequently, Uganda was among the world’s 
first to begin alignment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with its national planning 
frameworks. The aspiration of the Agenda is to build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and 
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 2030. Similarly, the aspiration of Agenda 2063 of 
African Union aspiration is to put in place the necessary infrastructure to support Africa’s accelerated 
integration and growth, technological transformation, trade and development. All these goals can be linked 
to the main strategic documents of Uganda.  
 
2.2 Digital Transformation of Economy  
At the end 2020, 30.8 million devices were connected to the network in Uganda. These include mobile 
handsets, laptops, tablets and other IOT terminals. The growth is significant – during the last 12 months 
3.7 million new devices were connected to the network. In December 2020, the number of active internet 
subscriptions had grown to 21.4 million which means more than 1 active connection for every 2 Ugandans 
[3]. According to the ITU Digital Development Dashboard 2020 24% of Uganda’s population is using the 
Internet (data from 2017) thus positioning as average in the African region, with significant potential for 
growth.  
 

 
 
11 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
Figure 1. Mobile and fixed Internet subscriptions in 2020 [2]. 
However, broadband access in Uganda is largely mobile and rate of fixed broadband penetration is still 
very low (0.1% of all Internet subscriptions in the 4th quarter of 2020 are fixed). The low fixed broadband 
access implies that there is little progress in promoting broadband access to anchor institutions like schools, 
libraries, health centers, and Local Government offices and that a critical mass of institutions and businesses 
are not using broadband services to be competitive.  
 
 
Figure 2. How the Internet is used? Monthly user traffic profile in 4th quarter of 2020 [2]. 
In recent years, and in particular during the global pandemic crisis, Uganda has witnessed an increase in 
malware distribution, business email compromises, the spread of fake news and mobile money network 
fraud. In early October 2020, Uganda’s telecoms and banking sectors were plunged into crisis due to a 
major hack that compromised the country’s mobile money network. At least $3.2 million is estimated to 
have been stolen in that incident, in which hackers used around 2,000 mobile SIM cards to gain access to 
the mobile money payment system. 
 
By the end of 2020, total active mobile money accounts stood at 22.5 million of the 28 million registered 
accounts. The trend in the mobile money industry and the growth in number of mobile money accepting 
businesses has been upward for the year 2020. The number of active mobile agents has grown to 235,790 

 
 
12 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
and the number of mobile money transactions during the last quarter of 2020 for the first time ever crossed 
the 1 billion transactions mark. 
 
In many African countries however, Uganda included, mobile-data baskets are still out of reach for a large 
part of the population, costing more than 10 per cent of Gross National Income per capita, in situations 
where incomes are already limited. In terms of affordability of fixed services, Africa is the region with the 
highest fixed-broadband basket prices and Uganda is no exception [4]. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The use of mobile money (* up to September 2020) [1]. 
The private sector in Uganda is dominated by about 1.1 million micro, small and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs) all together employing approximately 2.5 million people. The Uganda Vision 2040 aspires directly 
investing in strategic areas to stimulate the economy and facilitate private sector growth and targets 
increasing the growth of MSMEs to drive industrialization. National Development Plan recognizes the need 
to support the private sector, particularly local MSMEs, to develop capacity to drive the industrialization 
effort, increase exports, create jobs and increase local content. In the strategic ICT sector, SMEs can be 
supported through the system of incubation centres to develop their digital and financial literacy, and 
through supportive research and innovation facilities established and accessible to MSMEs. 
 
The 2018 After Access Survey shows that Internet use, mobile phone penetration, and the Internet use 
divisions between genders as well as urban and rural dwellers are correlated with Gross National Income 
(GNI) per capita. Uganda is classified as one of the least developed countries – a list of developing countries 
that, according to the UN, possess the lowest indicators of socioeconomic development and the lowest 
Human Development Index ratings among all countries in the world. The lack of electricity and 
underdeveloped ICT infrastructure are the primary causes of discrepancies in urban–rural Internet use and 
mobile phone penetration rates in Uganda. Uganda has a considerable urban–rural gap in Internet use of 
70 percent, where only nine percent of Ugandans living in rural areas have access to the Internet and 
about a third (30%) of urban area dwellers using it [5]. 
 
Several studies demonstrate that broadband penetration and broadband quality are important factors for 
economic growth. According to a World Bank study, it is estimated that for every 10% increase in 
broadband penetration in low and middle income countries result in a commensurate increase of 1.38% of 
the GDP [6]. Studies also reveal the economic impact of broadband deployment directly through jobs 
created by deploying broadband infrastructure, and indirectly as a result of ‘spill- over’ externalities, such 
as increased productivity and new products and services i.e. through accelerated innovation.  
 
2.3 Cyber Crime 
Cybersecurity continues to be a challenge in Uganda and the share of cyber (computer) crimes in total 
economic crimes is on the rise. In 2020 the cybercrime report of the Uganda Police acknowledges the 
relative increase in cases of cybercrimes related cases and they led to a loss of UGX 15,949,236,000 in 
2020. The major categories of cybercrimes were electronic fraud and obtaining money by false pretense. 
[7] 
 

 
 
13 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
Figure 4. Major categories of cybercrimes [8]. 
In addition to economic crimes, cybersecurity threats pose a serious risk to the integrity of the e-
government system and internet in Uganda generally. [7] 
 
The Uganda Police Force has digital forensics capacity and a cyber-crime unit. The cybercrime unit helps 
the Police to participate and get knowledge on current trends on cybersecurity. Police in collaboration with 
National Information Technology Authority – Uganda and Uganda Communications Commission have 
published several cybercrime awareness materials and initiated thematic campaigns. Cybercrime is reported 
to have had a 300% fold growth in the year 2020 [8], thus the need for capacity building and increase in 
cybersecurity awareness is urgent to cope with the increasing number of cybercrimes.  
 
2.4 Protection of Critical Infrastructure  
In 2011, the Government of Uganda developed the National Information Security Strategy (NISS) 
supporting sub-sector policies and frameworks within the ICT sector to secure critical national infrastructure 
and information resources. NISS recognizes the importance of the identification of critical infrastructure 
that are critical for the functioning of the society as a whole. In 2016 the protection of Uganda’s Critical 
Information Infrastructure and cyberspace was identified as one of 5 strategic goals of the draft 
cybersecurity strategy.  
 
The Computer Misuse Act 2011 provides guidance on sectors that are currently recognized as Critical 
National Infrastructure sectors in Uganda. According to the Act, a “protected computer” is a computer, 
program or data used directly in connection with or necessary for the security, defence or international 
relations of Uganda; law enforcement; the provision of services directly related to communications 
infrastructure, banking and financial services, public utilities; public key infrastructure and public safety. 
The 2014 National Information Security Policy and Framework (NISF) with its compulsory security measures 
applies to all organisations that operate protected computers. Policy is established by NITA-U. 
 

 
 
14 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
Figure 5. Areas of protected computers according to the Computer Misuse Act 2011. 
The establishment of security baseline for protected computers, programs or data in sectors specified in 
NISF and Computer Misuse Act (2011) has been the tool to address the national critical information 
infrastructure (NCII) protection in Uganda. However, Legislation and regulation do not provide for 
obligations for cyber-incident reporting, which remains ad-hoc activity and thereby exacerbates the 
potential impact of incidents.  
 
Latest development in the area is the Strategic Plan on the protection of National Critical Information 
Infrastructure approved by NITA-U in 2021. The document describes critical infrastructure sectors, the CNII 
operators as well as their role. 
 
2.5 Digital Awareness 
With the rapid growth of internet connectivity on the African continent, many Ugandans are getting access 
and connecting to the internet for the first time, while often lacking knowledge on how to protect 
themselves online. [10] Low levels of ICT literacy would make it difficult to launch awareness campaigns, 
which the Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre found to be almost non-existent in the African countries it 
surveyed. In 2017, 90% of African businesses were operating below the cybersecurity ‘poverty line’ – 
unprepared for cyber threats and an easy preys to cybercriminals. [11] 
 
The Government of Uganda has realized that cybersecurity awareness is crucial and considerable awareness 
raising efforts, coupled with increasing availability, access and affordability have been undertaken. These 
efforts include concerted ICT security awareness campaigns led by the MoICT & NG, NITA-U and UCC. For 
example, a review of NITA statistics report 2019 indicates Sensitization activities to enhance cyber legal 
awareness have been conducted over the years. In financial year 2018/19, there was an increment of 20 
percent in the number of awareness sessions conducted across the Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
(MDAs) and Local Governments. In July 2021, NITA-U embarked on a digital driven awareness campaign 
on cybersecurity with funding from the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program. The development 
and continuous implementation of cybersecurity awareness initiatives focusing on disseminating 

 
 
15 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
information about cybersecurity risks and threats, as well as about best practices for countering them, 
should be continued and enhanced.  
 
In addition, there is a need for a structured training and certification program/framework for cybersecurity 
related careers in Uganda. Education on cybersecurity issues is not offered as part of the curriculum in all 
levels of education, and there is limited budgetary allocation for research and development in this field. 
Gaps in information security in the country can be close best by integrating security into the education 
systems and making skill building easier and attainable. 
 
2.6 Uganda’s Performance on Global Indices 
Uganda has set the goal to improve rankings in the various global competitiveness indices. According to 
World Bank annual ratings Uganda is ranked 127 among 190 economies in the ease of doing business 
in 2018, a position it maintained in the following year (2019).  
 
Uganda ranked 152 out of 176 countries in the International Telecommunications Union’s IDI 
(2017); 121 out of 139 countries in the Network Readiness Index; and 64 out of 75 countries in the 
latest Economist Intelligence Unit Inclusive Internet Index (3i). Behind these rankings is the poor 
information infrastructure and low levels of Internet penetration in the country compared to others. 
 
In terms of Internet freedom, Uganda is considered as partly free and Internet penetration rates continue 
to improve despite a daily tax on social media use that limits access to communication platforms. In the E-
Government Development Index (EGDI), which presents the state of E-Government Development of 
the United Nations Member States, Uganda ranked 137 out of 193 countries in 2020. 
 
In the ITU Global Cybersecurity Index; in the African region Uganda ranks as 9th in 2020 (2018 7th), 
globally 70th (2018 65th). According to the index, the Uganda’s relative strength is in the implementation 
of legal measures but there is room for potential growth in the Cooperative Measures category (national, 
regional, and international cooperation), implementation of the Data Protection and Privacy Act and also in 
capacity building. In the National Cybersecurity Index of the e-Governance Academy, Uganda holds 
56th position globally and 3rd in African region. 
 

 
 
16 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Cybersecurity foundation in Uganda to date  
 
Current Cybersecurity Strategy 2021 builds on the following milestones: 
 
2009 – Establishment of NITA-U to implement the provisions of the NITA-U Act. 
 
2011 - Several laws were promulgated to guarantee a safe online environment for users and 
citizens, with a number of texts developed namely the Computer Misuse Act (2011), the Electronic 
Signatures Act (2011) and the Electronic Transactions Act (2011).  
 
2011 - Adoption of the National Information Security Strategy (NISS)  
 
2013 - Uganda Communications Commission revised mandate to implement the provisions of the 
UCC Act 2013 
 
2013-2014 – Establishment of Computer Emergency Response Teams: National CERT.UG/CC and 
Communications Sector CERT 
 
2014 – Publishment of the draft of the National Information Security Policy and Framework (NISF) 
 
2014 – Establishment of the National Information Security Advisory Group (NISAG) as forum for 
coordinating implementation of cybersecurity best practices in CII operators 
 
2019 - Enactment of the Data Protection and Privacy Act (2019) 
 
2020 - Publishment of the draft of the Digital Uganda Vision  

 
 
17 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3. STRATEGIC TASKS 
3.1 Safe and trusted digital economy 
 
 
The real potential for economic growth and large-scale job creation lies in spreading digital innovations 
from lead firms to the rest of the economy. The role of governments is to create an environment that 
enables the many private sector actors to benefit from digitalization. Studies demonstrate that broadband 
penetration and broadband quality are important factors for economic growth. They also reveal the 
economic impact of broadband deployment directly through jobs created by deploying broadband 
infrastructure, and indirectly by increased productivity and the creation of new products and services. 
According to a World Bank study, it is estimated that for every 10% increase in broadband penetration in 
low- and middle-income countries, there is a commensurate increase of 1.38% of the GDP [6].  
 
3.1.1 Implement PKI and e-Signature 
Government will make effort to create an online environment that is safe and trusted by society and 
businesses. The vision is a user-friendly digital ecosystem where the security of personal and sensitive data 
and information is assured, and users’ rights are protected.  
 
To improve the trust and confidence towards digital transactions and e-services, the Government will 
enforce the adoption and implementation of digital standards, laws and regulations that 
ensure security of online transactions Uganda has taken steps towards a safer service environment. 
The Electronic Signature Act 2011 together with relevant regulations provide a framework for the provisions 
and use of electronic signatures. The Act regulates the use of advanced electronic signatures, digital 
signatures and the use of third-party certification systems, such as a public key infrastructure (PKI), for the 
purposes of securing information conveyed over the internet and authenticating or certifying electronic 
signatures. Government of Uganda through NITA-U is implementing the UgPass pilot project, a new digital 
authentication and electronic signatures´solution for Uganda which will activate use of PKI services. 
 
Uganda will take advantage of rapid advances in digital technology to establish national digital ID platforms 
or systems that serve the whole nation, including enterprises. Digital ID and signature are vital components 
of the modern economy, without which digital transformation will be impossible.  
Safe and 
trusted 
digital 
economy 
Develop and implement digital identity to facilitate utilization of 
e-services
Prioritize support for MSMEs
A public key infrastructure (PKI) is a set of roles, policies, and procedures 
needed to create, manage, distribute, use, store, and revoke digital certificates 
and manage public-key encryption. The purpose of a PKI is to facilitate the 
secure electronic transfer of information for a range of network activities 
such as e-commerce, internet banking and confidential email. 

 
 
18 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.1.2 Increased focus on enterprises 
African economic growth has been steady for 25 years, but the continent has not fully enjoyed the benefits 
of digitalisation for economic and social progress. Also, policymakers are becoming more aware of the need 
to secure the digital future, as cybersecurity became part of the African Union Agenda 2063. Business 
operations have shifted further online during the COVID-19 pandemic, placing increased demands on 
private sector cybersecurity practices. MSMEs are often the most common size of business within a country 
and make up a significant part of national economy as 90% of businesses are MSMEs, 50% of employment 
stems from MSMEs, and formal MSMEs contribute up to 40% of Gross Domestic Product in emerging 
economies. Thus, Uganda has to nurture entrepreneurship and innovation. 
 
MSMEs are also often least able to tackle cybersecurity. This puts SMEs in need of cybersecurity awareness 
activities, accessible cybersecurity guidelines and tools. The Government will provide its support and 
dedicated programs for MSMEs to enhance the awareness how to safely conduct business in today’s 
networked environment. Uganda will develop a scheme that will help small and medium size enterprises to 
protect their organizations, against the most common cyberattacks. Governmental cybersecurity web 
portal will provide guidelines and awareness-raising materials and initiatives focused on MSMEs.  
 
The compromise of personal data can damage the legitimate rights and interests of cause adverse 
disruptions to the affected individuals and businesses. With increasing amounts of data migrating to 
computer systems and electronic devices, there is a need to secure these systems and safeguard 
individuals’ data against theft and misuse. At the same time, organisations can leverage good personal 
data management to gain a better understanding of their customers, increase business efficiency and 
effectiveness, and boost customer confidence.  
 
Uganda through the Personal Data Protection Office will intensify the work with private organizations 
to embrace data protection as part of their corporate culture and take reasonable steps to manage and 
secure personal information that they hold. Through industry briefings, online training resources, and 
advisory guidelines, MSMEs will be equipped with information on the requirements of the Data Protection 
Act and good data management practices. 
 
3.1.3 Action Areas 
 
By fostering safe and trusted digital economy, the Government of Uganda 
(GoU) will:  
 
a) Implement digital identity to facilitate utilization of e-services 
GoU will pilot the UgPass to implement a whole-of-nation PKI and deploy the essential enabling 
building blocks for modern and safe e-services. The standards for electronic signatures will be 
updated and described. GoU will continue to scale the usage of PKI within government IT enabled 
services and applications.  
 
b) Prioritise support for SMEs  
GoU will provide support by providing cybersecurity guidelines and standards for voluntary 
compliance and dedicated capacity building programs for MSMEs to enhance the awareness on 
how safely conduct business in today’s networked environment. As part of the program GoU will 
work with private organizations to embrace cybersecurity and data protection as part of their 
corporate culture. 
 
 
 

 
 
19 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
3.2 Threat preparedness and response 
 
 
 
3.2.1 Risk management  
It is important to realise that cybersecurity incidents can never be completely prevented. The rapid 
development of technology and its accelerated spread also increases the potential for security incidents. 
Therefore, in addition to preventing incidents, the focus must also be on cyber resilience – i.e. on the 
control and reduction of damage caused by incidents. This requires two types of action: first, 
proactive measures aimed at preventing incidents, and second, reactive ones to control and reduce 
damage. 
 
Figure 6. Measures to achieve cyber resilience.  
Continuous gathering and analysis of information on security incidents both domestically and internationally 
makes the rapid identification of threats possible and the resolution of incidents more effective. Therefore, 
Uganda will put continuous effort to identify and understand potential threats (threat intelligence) 
and the risks associated with these threats (risk awareness). There is also a need for resources to detect 
and cope with incidents (incident management) and to plan activities and resources to deal with the 
damage caused by incidents (recovery). The existence of such measures will, on the one hand, increase 
the ability to prevent incidents by increasing overall security and, on the other hand, significantly reduce 
the adverse impact of incidents on society. [1]  
 
Threat 
preparedness
and response
Promote risk assessment practices based on central 
risk repository
Develop central incident register and sectoral 
incident scenarios
Develop tools  for information sharing
Strengthen national and sectoral CERTs
Publish regularly Cyber Threat Landscape Report
Establish programs for a capacity building about risk 
management

 
 
20 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Global cyberattacks during recent years have caused a massive financial and reputational damage to states 
states, governments, companies, and private citizens. To improve Uganda’s resilience against such 
incidents it is essential to detect, analyze, understand, and mitigate cybersecurity risks.  
 
Cybersecurity risks involve three components: 
- 
Threat. Threat can be technological like malware, geopolitical like adversary nation state, crime like an 
organized crime group or even environmental like extreme weather conditions. 
- 
Vulnerability. Vulnerability is often described as a weakness of computer system which can be exploited. 
In the cyber ecosystem, vulnerability is more complex and can be technological, organizational, 
administrative etc weaknesses that leave the ecosystem open to cyberthreats. 
- 
Consequence (impact). Consequence can be assessed combining likelihood of the cyber incident with 
potential impact to the ecosystem or its components. 
 
Figure 7. Three components of cybersecurity risk. 
To mitigate cybersecurity risk and minimize the negative impact of cyber threats, Government will continue 
the update of National Information Risk Register, develop and regularly update sector based risk 
scenarios for incident management (for energy, communications, government sectors etc). Both national 
level and sector oriented cyber risk repositories improve understanding about current cybersecurity risks 
and allows to forecast and model trends. 
 
The responsible regulatory bodies and NCII operators will update periodically the list of their critical services 
due to continually changing threat landscape.  
 
Uganda will establish the mandatory incident reporting for NCII and government sector and aggregate a 
national level incident register, which is essential for understanding security situation and to plan, 
develop and implement appropriate security measures for different sectors.  
 
For a successful and efficient risk management, Uganda will foster inter-agency cooperation in 
cybersecurity related matters, especially in information sharing, and will establish special programs for 
a capacity building for sectors that have less resources for cybersecurity such as MSMEs, healthcare 
institutions. 
3.2.2 Preparedness and incident response  
Today, organizations’ ability to handle potential incidents is inevitable. Globally, 86,2% of companies are 
being compromised by at least one successful attack in 2021. Notably, this doesn’t account for attempted 
attacks or those that went unreported. [9] Even though when global investments to cybersecurity are 
enormous, due to the dynamics of cyberspace, fast growing number of threats and rapid digitalization, 
attack surface of cyberthreats is increasing fast. Many of attacks and other incidents can be prevented by 
efficient threat intelligence, risk awareness and smart technological protection. However, since cyber 
incidents will continue to take place, appropriate incident management and incident recovery framework 
shall be established for Uganda. 
 
In order to efficiently respond to incidents, Uganda will define clearly national working arrangements 
for information exchange and incident response. ICT incidents tend to escalate very rapidly, thus the roles 
of the various organisations and agencies, cooperation arrangements and mechanisms for exchange of 
information must be defined and organised. Given the need for extensive cooperation with the private 
sector and with future sector specific CSIRTs (e.g financial, energy etc.), sectoral CSIRTs will develop 
specific competence (such as security of industrial control systems) that is needed for incident management 
in specific sectors. 

 
 
21 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
The threat environment and criminal landscape is in constant change, which means that the Government 
needs new tools, approaches and creativity for incident management at MDAs, NCII operators, police and 
law enforcement to stand a chance. Uganda will clarify common interests of various stakeholders and 
create appropriate tools or methods for information sharing. Communication and information 
sharing both within public sector and private sector and between public and private sector is a prerequisite 
for efficient response to incidents. 
 
Sound incident and crisis management plans as well as general knowledge about threat landscape 
guarantees the preparedness for incidents. Uganda will draft and establish national and sectoral 
incident resolution plans as a part of national emergency planning and crises management. 
 
Testing the rules and plans for information sharing and incident management guarantee their efficiency. 
Uganda will regularly conduct cyber drills. Cyberdrills will be organised both within teams and at the 
national level. 
 
3.2.3 Action Areas 
 
To be prepared to threats and guarantee a sustainable national level cyber risk 
management and response system, GoU will:  
a) Promote risk assessment practices based on central risk repository & regularly publish 
the Cyber Threat Landscape Report. GoU will establish a mechanism for regular threat 
intelligence and analysis at strategic and tactical level. That shall include collection and analysis of 
the information about strategic threat vectors such as geopolitical tensions, increasing cybercrime 
etc. as well as technical information of cyber-attacks, characteristics of malware etc. Common cyber 
risk assessment methodology will be established for MDAs and NCII operators. The National 
Information Risk Register will provide up-to-date information about current cybersecurity risks and 
allows to observe and predict trends. 
b) Develop central incident register and sectoral incident scenarios. GoU will establish the 
mandatory incident reporting for NCII and government sector and develop clear guidelines for 
reporting. NITA-U will manage an aggregated national level incident register.  GoU will generate 
sector-based risk scenarios for incident management and prepare national and sectoral incident 
resolution plans as a part of national emergency planning and crises management. 
c) Strengthen national and promote sectoral CERTs. GoU will enhance capacity and capability 
for incident response especially heavily focusing on the proactive approach, increasing capacity 
building for first level incident responders and home grown re-usable security monitoring solutions 
for organisations. 
d) Develop tools for information sharing. GoU will foster cooperation and communication 
between security, law enforcement and other government agencies and provide a Cyber Threat 
Intelligence information sharing framework. National emergency planning and crises management 
will be enhanced through the development of large-scale cyber incident management plans. 
e) Establish programs for capacity building in the risk management. GoU will establish 
capacity building programs for sectors hat have less resources for cybersecurity such as MSMEs, 
healthcare institutions.  
 

 
 
22 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
3.3 Robust cybersecurity ecosystem 
  
The complex and interconnected nature of cyberspace is such that ensuring holistic cybersecurity 
becomes a shared responsibility between the Government, private sector and other stakeholders as part of 
our country’s national critical information infrastructure is run by the private sector. A robust national 
ecosystem guaranteeing cybersecurity requires the involvement of all key stakeholders, both state and 
non-state actors, and at national and international level based on collaboration. Assets that are essential 
to the functioning and security of a society and economy of the country are Critical Infrastructure (CI). 
National Critical Information Infrastructure (NCII) are ICT systems that operate key functions of the critical 
infrastructure.  
The protection of NCII in Uganda is addressed from a risk management perspective. Regular risk 
assessments guide the identification of national critical infrastructure and services, whose disruption may 
have a serious impact on the security or economic well-being 
of citizens and harm Uganda’s possibilities to benefit from 
digitalisation. A risk-based approach also enables to prioritize 
implementation of programs and policies designed to protect 
NCIIs.  
 
Earlier strategic interventions, i.e. the 2011 NISS recognizes the prominence of protecting critical 
information infrastructure from disruption and the role of public-private partnerships as one of the guiding 
principles of Uganda. The Computer Misuse Act addresses the offences in relation with protected computers 
in certain areas and economic sectors, however, it does not organize transparently the principles and criteria 
for determining the NCII ecosystem, nor does it outlines minimum cybersecurity baselines addressing NCII 
operators.  
 
The establishment of a security baseline for protected computers, programs or data in sectors specified in 
NISF and Computer Misuse Act (2011) has been the current practice to address the critical information 
infrastructure protection in Uganda.  
 
In order to enhance the transparency and thereby boost trust between the private and the public sector, 
the Government will implement the strategic plan on the protection of National Critical Information 
Infrastructure containing a list of critical sectors to be considered as essential for the maintenance of 
critical societal and economic activities. The national level risk assessments provided by NITA-U and NISAG 
will serve as a basis of reviewing the list and any future NCII updates.  
 
Robust cyber-
security 
ecosystem
Implement the strategic plan on the protection of 
NCII
Promote cooperation and understanding of 
cybersecurity risks in all critical sectors
Raising awareness of supply chain risks
Update of the minimal cybersecurity baseline for NCII 
operators
Create effective governance and management 
structure for protection of NCII 
The protection of National Critical 
Information Infrastructure relies on 
regular and up-to-date risk assessments 

 
 
23 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
The protection of NCII in various sectors exceeds the capabilities and mandate of any single Government 
agency. In Uganda, the National Information Security Advisory Group (NISAG), an inter-sectoral working 
group provides the platform for collaboration.  
 
Considering the changing threat environment, the 
update of the minimal cybersecurity baseline for 
NCII operators is inevitable. However, this should be 
done cognizant of the maturity level of the country to 
avoid the adoption of requirements that are too stringent 
and not implementable in Uganda’s current setting. The 
Ministry of ICT, responsible regulators, NISAG and 
owners of critical information infrastructures will assess the cybersecurity baseline and provide consistent 
updates to the baseline consistent with international standards and best practice.  
 
The baseline relies on the risk management approach and provides guidelines to NCII operators about the 
implementation of necessary security measures. It is required that every operator of critical services and 
infrastructure implements security measures. 
NCII operators prepare or update their contingency 
plans of critical ICT systems based on the national 
risk environment. Among others, the baseline will 
address 
incident 
response 
and 
vulnerability 
disclosure among other topics and the mandatory 
implementation of the cybersecurity baseline by NCII 
operators that needs to be regularly audited. 
 
The Government will continue working together with 
NCII operators to promote understanding of cybersecurity risks. The cooperation and exchange of 
information between government agencies and the private sector to identify cyber threats will ensure that 
the critical ICT systems are protected to a level that is 
commensurate with the risks faced to ensure the operation 
and recovery of critical services and infrastructures. The 
National Information Security Advisory Group - NISAG -
provides cyber threat landscape assessment based on 
the National Information Risk Register. Furthermore, cyber 
incident reporting will be made mandatory for all 
government authorities and NCII operators. The overview of incidents serves as basis for comprehensive 
cyber threat landscape assessment. NCII operators will be bound to report cyber incidents to their sectoral 
regulators such is the current practice for communications sector under UCC. As referred in the previous 
chapter, NISAG’s risk register helps to align cyber risk management with the country’s national 
crisis/contingency management plan. It can also help harness the necessary capabilities/capacities, people, 
funding, and strategies to strengthen the overall cybersecurity posture of the Nation.  
 
Throughout the years, NISAG has been a platform for collaboration between NCII operators and the 
government sector. Through NISAG, they have shared the information on an ad hoc basis. NISAG shall 
develop its procedures, document the NCII assets in the country and will promote a fluent information flow 
with oversight supervision from the Ministry of ICT and NG. Recognizing the critical and highly 
interdependent role of NCII operators in managing cybersecurity risks and responding to incidents, the 
Government will provide the communication channels and cooperation mechanisms between 
public and private agencies. For every critical sector a National Regulatory Authority will be appointed, 
that serves as a sectoral national contact point. The role of the contact points is to take lead of NCII 
protection withing their sectors, to synthesize the information collected from NCII operators and contribute 
to the cyber threat landscape assessment on national level.  
 
ICT service providers and NCII operators shall pay attention to risks that are related to supply chain 
security. Threat intelligence and respective risk assessments shall be monitored during the IT development 
Established formats for private-public 
partnership are essential for boosting 
trust amongst and between the industry 
and the government. 
NCII Governance model defines clear 
responsibilities of every stakeholder.  
 
Minimum cybersecurity baselines for NCII 
operators will be established with 
appropriate legislative mechanisms. 
Guiding principles for NCIIs are the principles 
of personality and minimal adverse 
effects. Ensuring the security of a system is 
arranged by the service provider and in case of 
security incident, service provider will apply 
due care and measures to avoid the escalation 
and spread of the effect of the incident and 
will notify the supervisory authority. 

 
 
24 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
stage and in the software and hardware tendering processes. Government through NITA-U will develop 
respective guidelines. 
 
This Strategy aims to create an effective governance and management framework. Establishing 
sustainable partnerships among the Government and NCII operators requires that all participating 
stakeholders define a clear understanding of the goals of the partnership and the mutual security benefits 
that stem from dedicated and meaningful collaboration. Areas of cooperation include establishing effective 
coordinating structures and information-sharing processes and protocols, building trust through joint events 
and exercises that enhance cross-sectoral response, exchanging best practices for improving security, as 
well as improving international coordination.  
 
3.3.1 Action Areas 
 
GoU will work with key stakeholders - the NCII operators and the 
cybersecurity community - in five major areas. GoU will:  
a) Implement the strategic plan on the protection of National Critical Information 
Infrastructure. The strategic plan provides clear criteria on defining critical sectors and the roles 
and responsibilities of NCII operators, but also supervisory authorities to ensure the transparency 
and boosting trust amongst and between the government and private sector.  
b) Raise awareness of supply chain security risks  
GoU will increase the adoption of Security-by-Design practices and address cybersecurity issues 
upstream and along the supply chain. GoU will enhance the implementation of national 
cybersecurity standard for critical infrastructure, including requirements for software and hardware 
that can be used in vital services. The Government will start the preparations for developing 
accreditation standards for hardware, software and IT services deployed in NCII. 
c) Update of the minimal cybersecurity baseline for NCII operators  
Based on international standards and best practice, GoU will enhance the implementation of 
security measures of NCII operators based on the regular risk assessments. To achieve the goal, 
the Government will set legal requirements for minimum cybersecurity baseline of NCIIs. The 
standard includes the requirements for information sharing and incident reporting.  
d) Create effective governance and management structure for protection of NCII  
GoU will introduce legal provisions that give the relevant sector regulators the authority and 
resources to oversee compliance. This will assist in the efforts to implement the current strategy 
goals and achieve cross-sectoral agreements.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
25 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.4 Cyber Skilled Uganda 
 
 
End users are often the weakest link in the cybersecurity chain. This is true when the users lack the 
training to take informed security decisions while carrying out digital activities. As people begin to become 
more connected, they need support to develop cybersecurity capacity to better respond to threats. Securing 
the cyber domain through capacity building activities contributes to reducing issues such as cyber risks and 
digital divide. 
 
Promotion of the cybersecurity skills has been the main goals throughout the previous strategic 
interventions. However, a concerted effort by  
 
the Ugandan government to create online safety through skilled professionals and risk aware users 
demands an effort on continuous basis as the gap in the required skills set for cybersecurity still exists. 
3.4.1 Engrain cybersecurity through all stages of education 
The review of the educational curricula is an ongoing task, and it shall meet current and future needs. To 
bridge the gap of institutional knowledge and shortage of skills Government of Uganda will promote and 
facilitate the development of cybersecurity educational programs. Inclusion of information security topics 
in the national ICT related curricula in all educational institutions across primary, secondary and 
tertiary levels is the goal. Curricula should be interdisciplinary and besides the technical knowledge 
also non-technical cybersecurity skills and topics, such as digital literacy, public policy and governance, 
economics, social sciences or international relations shall be covered. 
 
The focus of Uganda is also on creating a skilled professional workforce based on local content and provide 
the required human resource pool. Government will integrate cybersecurity courses in all computer 
science and IT programs in higher education, including teaching computer security and forensics as a 
subject or field of expertise. Dedicated cybersecurity degrees and apprenticeships will be created and 
additional resources for supporting the new degrees at the tertiary level will be applied. In addition, the 
curricula should foster awareness of and stimulate interest in cybersecurity career opportunities. To further 
the efforts in this space, the Government will consider various incentive schemes, such as scholarships and 
grants but also establishment of an accreditation mechanism for quality assurance of cybersecurity training 
programs in universities. 
 
Given the multi-disciplinary nature of cybersecurity capacity building, universities, colleges, and other 
educational institutions should be encouraged to work across departments and with other academic 
partners to develop or update their programs. To achieve the goal, the cooperation and collaboration 
between educational institutions will be enhanced and a framework for delivering cybersecurity 
knowledge throughout the education system, especially in primary and secondary schools will be generated. 
Cyber 
Skilled 
Uganda
Engrain cybersecurity through all stages of education
Improve expertise, skills and competencies
Raising public cybersecurity  awareness
Enhance knowledge trough research and development

 
 
26 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.4.2 Improve expertise, skills and competencies 
A qualified and highly skilled human resource base is pivotal to a successful information security strategy 
implementation. Expertise is required in areas like information security management, auditing and 
forensics. In order to diminish the lack of adequate human resource base both in Government authorities 
but also in private sector, Government will continuously coordinate cybersecurity programs and promote 
information security career development.  
 
Digital Uganda Vision aims to reach universal digital literacy and comprehensive utilization of e-services. 
Thus, the public sector needs to hire skilled officers able to guarantee the availability and safety of the e-
services but also to develop relevant policies and implement them. Cybersecurity skills shall be 
integrated into core competencies in public sector institutions and advocating the creation of 
cybersecurity roles such as the Chief Information Security Officer in individual public sector institutions is 
inevitable when the role and impact of ICT systems grows.  
 
With the cost of cybercrime increasing every year across Uganda, the Government is committed to ensure 
that competent authorities better awareness of the threat of cybercrime and information security. 
Therefore, trainings within the Justice Law and Order Sector but also in Defence Sector, will continue.  
 
For supporting the cybersecurity competencies and share the information among public institutions, NITA-
U as the core implementer of the Cybersecurity Strategy provides networking facilities to 
knowledgeable IT officers across Government MDAs, but also implements capacity building program for IT 
personnel of MDAs.  
 
As the experienced cybersecurity professionals are in high demand, certification schemas are crucial 
steppingstone for almost all careers. Government will coordinate cybersecurity programs and promote 
information security career development. In partnerships with academia Government will develop 
and implement curriculum but also specialized courses that address the required skills. 
 
Government will support and implement professional training courses and skills development schemes for 
professionals in other sectors as well. First, an assessment of capacity skills gap at across NCII 
operators will be carried out to determine the required resources. In order to promote the establishment 
of sectoral CSIRT teams, the need to recruit and train experts in the fields of incident management and 
forensics and cybercrime prevention is vital. 
3.4.3 Raising public cybersecurity awareness 
Digital Uganda Vision promotes universal digital literacy and development, adoption and utilization of e-
services. All those using the Internet and related technologies, need to understand the role they play in 
safeguarding sensitive or personal data. The rise of the Internet demands a responsible cybersecurity 
culture, safe Internet habits and practices to protect personal information online and safely use e-services.  
 
Government will continue to carry out the awareness programs to cover various target groups. The 
aim is to promote trust in e-government and e-commerce services. GoU will broaden the reach of program 
across age groups and include both individuals and businesses and create initiatives to inform the public 
continuously of the current and emerging cybercrime trends, defenses and cyber threats. Annual events 
like Cybersecurity Week to promote information security will be organized in addition to continuous 
awareness raising campaigns to improve cybersecurity awareness and literacy of the public focusing 
on disseminating information about cybersecurity risks and threats. The Government also introduces and 
designs cybersecurity awareness and school-based competitions. 
 
Government of Uganda through NITA-U, together with cross sectoral partners will continue to enhance the 
cybersecurity awareness portal (besafeoline website) acting as a reference point for cybersecurity 
awareness-raising materials and initiatives.  

 
 
27 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.4.4 Enhance knowledge through research and development 
The aspect of R&D within the Ugandan context ensures the availability of local innovations and solutions 
that fit the current challenges. Building capacity in this area makes us active participants to global 
cybersecurity solutions. There are good examples of cooperation and initiatives in the R&D area. 
Government of Uganda has designed the National ICT Initiatives Support Program (NIISP) to facilitate the 
creation of an ICT Innovation ecosystem and marketplace for Ugandan innovative digital products like 
software applications and innovations industry. 
 
Government will continuously support Research and Development programs in universities in 
Uganda in the area of cybersecurity. GoU will promote the development and commercialization of 
intellectual properties, technologies and innovations through focused research and development. GoU will 
support incubators and startups with a commercial approach that involve public and private actors, and 
ensure elements of competition and merit in the selection process.  
 
Government support is vital also for enterprises that are undertaking Research and Development in 
cybersecurity. Therefore, Uganda will deepen partnerships for the development of interfaces to research 
and innovation and interaction between universities and the local economy, so that skills are linked to 
market needs.  
 
Our goal is to provide an ecosystem comprising from highly skilled professionals, companies with deep 
cybersecurity capabilities and strong translational research and development. The ecosystem will ensure a 
sustainable source of expertise and solutions to support our plans for a resilient national infrastructure and 
a safer cyberspace. Government will establish incentives to develop partnerships for the development of 
interfaces to research and innovation and interaction between universities and the local economy, so that 
skills are linked to market needs.  
 
3.4.5 Action Areas 
 
To promote cybersecurity skills and awareness in Uganda, GoU will:  
a) Engrain cybersecurity through all stages of education 
GoU will incorporate cybersecurity as a core learning area at the earliest levels of our education 
system as well as a specialized area at university and tertiary levels for professionals. 
b) Improve expertise, skills and competencies  
GoU will continuously coordinate cybersecurity programs and promote information security career 
development by developing specialized courses and curricula, supporting certification schemas, 
providing networking facilities and support trainings focused on NCII operators, military and law 
enforcement training programs. 
c) Raising public cybersecurity awareness  
GoU will develop comprehensive program to increase populations awareness. The program will be 
integrated with the digital (IT) awareness campaigns, in cooperation with telecoms, payment 
service providers etc.  
d) Enhance knowledge trough research and development 
Government will continuously support Research and Development programs in universities and 
promote the development and commercialization of intellectual properties, technologies and 
innovations through focused research and development. Uganda will promote the research to 
support the use of safest solutions. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
28 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.5 Active and reliable partner of international 
community 
 
 
Uganda is partnering various regional and global cooperation initiatives focused on an enhancing 
cybersecurity and fighting on cross-border cybercrime. However, Uganda has yet to sign and ratify both 
the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection (the “Malabo Convention”) 
and the Convention on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe (Budapest Convention) [10]. The Ministry of 
Justice and Constitutional Affairs (MoJCA) is part the inter-agency team which is gathered to accede to the 
Budapest Convention. Within the planning accession, MoJCA will provide the 24/7 single point of contact 
for international cooperation against organized and transnational cyber crimes. 
 
Still, in the light of rolling technological innovation to foster the development of the digital economy, against 
the background of the convergence of information and media services, networks and devices, Uganda 
acknowledges, that cybersecurity remains essential domain to balance the developments with the need to 
combat cyber threats on both national and regional level, but also on global arena. Considering increasing 
evolving threats to cybersecurity, which may constitute serious threats to national, regional, continental 
and international peace and security, GoU recognizes that international partnerships play essential role in 
strengthening collective cybersecurity capacities. International partnerships generate opportunities for 
information sharing and operational collaboration while representing our national interests. Therefore, 
Uganda remains dedicated on pursuing its active participation in both regional and international forums 
contributing to strengthening collective cybersecurity efforts and to address combating cybercrime and 
cyber threats on national, regional and global level.  
 
Hence, the Strategy aspires to guide global and regional engagements of Uganda across cyber affairs to 
maintain peace and security. Uganda will invest on coordinating and on establishing the national 
cooperation forums and formats to develop constructive and favorable international collaboration avenues 
of mutual interest. 
Active and 
reliable 
partner of 
International 
community 
Increasing bi- and multilateral dialogues on regional level 
Building capacity and confidence through international cooperation
Promoting calls for action for Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace
Uganda on the International arena 
 
Uganda cooperates with following international organizations and forums: 
 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) 
 
Commonwealth Telecommunications Organization 
 
African Telecommunications Union 
 
Commonwealth Cybercrime Initiative (CCI) 
 
East Africa Communications Organization  
 
Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) 
 
Uganda has signed Memorandum of Understanding on fighting cybercrime with Kenya, 
Rwanda and South Sudan under the Northern Corridor Infrastructure Program.  

 
 
29 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
3.5.1 Enhance Regional Perspective 
The African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council has stressed the need for Member States to undertake 
regular cybersecurity risk assessments. Therefore, Uganda is dedicated to further cooperation avenues with 
the AU Commission, as well as with the AU Member States, to further enhance the both national and 
regional cybersecurity capacities, in order to more effectively address cybersecurity challenges and  combat 
cyber-crimes including the abuse and misuse of the internet. The Peace and Security Council is a key pillar 
of the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) and is a standing decision-making organ of the AU 
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict. Developing ways for close collaboration among 
AU Member States and stakeholders, Uganda is dedicated to contribute to the discussions of the African 
Union Cybersecurity Expert Group (AUCSEG). Further, Uganda follows the AU Mechanism for Police 
Cooperation (AFRIPOL) and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) for its continued 
technical support to the efforts being deployed by the AU Member States towards preventing and mitigating 
the risks posed by cybercrimes. Further, Uganda is proud to host Eastern Africa's Regional Intelligence 
Unit, that was established following a resolution of the 5th meeting of Peace and Security Council of the 
African Union held on 2nd of September in Nairobi. Uganda is committed to accelerate its efforts to develop 
cooperation mechanisms and initiatives with regional partners.  
3.5.2 Actively take International Avenues  
International collaboration is key in ensuring the presence of sufficient capacity and mechanisms to handle 
cyber threats from a foreign adversary as well as provide assistance to international allies.  Within the 
planning accession, MoJCA will provide the 24/7 single point of contact for international cooperation against 
organized and transnational cybercrimes. 
 
Participating in International Cybersecurity Diplomatic Negotiations 
The United Nations has put efforts to maintain a meaningful conversation on International Cybersecurity 
Diplomatic Negotiations for the last 15 years, mainly through the establishment of the Group of Government 
Experts (GGE), to discuss international cyber policies. Uganda will follow a Global Approach set up the 
ongoing United Nations Open-ended Working Group. In addition to technical skills, states recognized during 
OEWG’s discussions that there is a pressing need for building expertise across a range of diplomatic, policy, 
legislative and regulatory areas. Uganda is engaged to contribute to the discussions on the responsible 
state behaviour in cyberspace, led by the UN 
 
Further, Uganda welcomes joining the Paris Call that invites all cyberspace actors to work together and 
encourage States to cooperate with private sector partners, the world of research and civil society. The 
supporters of the Paris Call commit to working together to adopt responsible behaviour and implement 
within cyberspace the fundamental principles which apply in the physical world. 
 
Inspired by the Commonwealth Cyber Declaration  
 
Uganda is striving to establishing and developing the foundations for an effective cybersecurity 
response and capacity building across diplomatic, policy, legislative, regulatory and technical areas to 
support both national and international peace and stability.  
 
Uganda is committed to take actions to ensure designing a cyberspace that supports economic and 
social development and rights online. 

 
 
30 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.5.3 Building capacity and confidence through collaboration 
International collaboration is key in ensuring the presence of sufficient capacity and mechanisms to handle 
cyber threats from a foreign adversary as well as provide assistance to international allies when required.  
 
The effort to improve national cybersecurity will be assisted by participating in regional or international The 
effort to improve national cybersecurity will be assisted by participating in regional or international forums 
that can provide education and training. Uganda welcomes and pursues participation in available programs 
and activities of multilateral organizations that seek to improve and enhance global cybersecurity. Uganda 
recognizes the continuing need to foster international collaboration and efforts to address cybersecurity 
issues, including information sharing and assistance. Since mutual legal assistance regime is part of the 
Malabo Convention, Uganda recognizes the importance to finalise the accession process to develop 
exchange information mechanisms on cyber threats. 
 
Further, Uganda is dedicated to ensuring its active participation in international CERT and cybersecurity 
communities and initiatives, to improve and maintain connectivity and cooperation with international 
partners. Further, Uganda intends take full advantage of the various capacity building initiatives of the 
Global Forum on Cybersecurity Experts (GFCE). 
 
3.5.4 Action Areas 
 
As an active and reliable partner of international community, GoU will:  
a) Increase both bi- and multilateral dialogues.  
The dialogues with the African Union states and the African Union to support cross-border law 
enforcement and other mechanisms that serve to achieving better common understanding of the 
cyber landscape 
b) Building capacity and confidence through international collaboration 
International collaboration aims to strengthen cyber-capacity and expertise in Uganda for 
government, businesses as well as for community. 
c) Promoting calls for action for Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace 
The initiatives contribute reducing risks to international peace and security and to the prevention 
of conflict. GoU will promote the participation of Uganda’s representatives in various international 
collaboration formats aiming for the responsible state behaviour in cyberspace. Government 
representatives will keep themselves in the loop on the international discussions, including the 
implementation of cyber norms and the application of international law in cyberspace as well as 
advancing cyber confidence and capacity building.  
 
 
 

 
 
31 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
3.6 Provide enabling governance framework 
 
 
 
 
3.6.1 Cybersecurity Governance and Coordination  
Intragovernmental commitment, coordination and cooperation represent core functions of governmental 
institutions, needed to ensure that the governance mechanisms (i.e. rules) and resources yield the desired 
outcomes of the Cybersecurity Strategy. The Strategy will be implemented by following the whole of 
government approach which considers the government as one entity. The model foresees the active 
collaboration across Government, with industry and other stakeholders in the implementation of the 
Strategy.  
 
Effective communication and coordination ensure that all ministries and government agencies are aware 
of each other’s respective authorities, missions, and tasks. The cybersecurity competent authority 
ensures that institutions and stakeholders work in a complementary manner.  
 
The implementation of the Strategy calls for formalizing national cybersecurity governance structure under 
multi-stakeholder model. The governance model is based on the principle of shared responsibility. The 
multitude of stakeholders consists of law- and policymakers, economic players, educational institutions, 
technical and business communities, law enforcement, academia, diplomatic, military organizations and 
others. 
 
The Cybersecurity Governance Framework is based on the current practice and considers earlier strategic 
choices. It needs to be stressed that the engagement of the stakeholders across government is both a pre-
requisite and an essential support for a successful implementation of the Cybersecurity Strategy. 
Collaboration presents a key to ensure that promises expressed and agreed in the Strategy are measurable 
and will be delivered in the future. 
 
Provide 
enabling 
framework 
and 
modernize 
legal 
environment
Customised Governance structure 
Modernizing legal framework for NCII
Revising Digital Identity and 
e-signature legislation
Fostering information 
sharing
Strengthening protection of National Critical Information 
Infrastructure
Government coordination is the prerequisite of 
the effective implementation of the vision. 

 
 
32 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
3.6.2 Roles of Authorities  
The following institutions are important in creating a favorable institutional framework that will guarantee 
the coordination and implementation of the strategy.  
 
President chairs the National Security Council 
 
Parliament will enact the Laws necessary for the enforcing the Cybersecurity Strategy 
 
Cabinet approves cybersecurity related strategies and provide exclusive support for the implementation 
of Strategy by coordinating the work of MDA’s. 
 
National Security Council is the top-level body responsible for security related issues to ensure and 
maintain internal security, peace and stability. The council is chaired by the President.  
 
Ministry of Information Communications Technology  and National Guidance (MoICT&NG) 
Ministry’s responsibility is to coordinate, provide leadership and oversight in matters of ICT and National 
Guidance. In relation to cybersecurity, the Ministry is responsible for the development of the relevant policy 
and legal framework for cybersecurity in Uganda. It also provides support towards the development of 
relevant legislations for the ICT sector and overall oversight for the ICT sector, including cybersecurity. The 
MoICT&NG is responsible for the evaluation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy.  
 
NITA-U 
NITA-U is an autonomous statutory body established under the NITA-U Act 2009 under the general 
supervision of the MoICT&NG. NITA-U’s task is to coordinate and regulate IT services in Uganda. NITA-U 
also sponsors and hosts the Uganda National Computer Emergency Response Team and Coordination 
Center (CERT.UG/CC) to act as the trusted point of contact, as well as provide central operational 
coordination for incident response at the national level. 
 
NITA-U is one of the key agencies on implementation of the Cybersecurity Strategy and has the task to 
coordinate the implementation with relevant other Ministries, Departments and Agencies. In addition, NITA-
U is the secretariat of NISAG. 
 
Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) 
UCC regulates the telecommunications and broadcasting sub sectors to ensure reliability, redundancy and 
security of the country’s communications infrastructure and consumer protection. It ensures compliance to 
national cybersecurity laws, policies and standards, and manages the Communications Sector Uganda 
Computer Emergency Response Team. 
 
Ministry of Defence  
Ministry of Defence has the responsibility for the protection of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
Uganda. The role of this ministry is to provide cybersecurity protection for all security digital infrastructures 
and defend the country’s cyberspace against internal and external cyber threats. MoD will establish and 
maintain cyber command. 
 
Ministry of Security   
Ministry together with the national security agencies under the Ministry is assessing threats for any 
cybersecurity risk. This entails building capabilities for the protection of Uganda’s cyberspace, providing 
support to fighting cybercrime and sharing intelligence information with relevant actors.  
 
Uganda Police Force 
Uganda Police Force has the responsibility of maintaining Law and Order in Uganda. The role of the Police 
is to continuously its capacity and capability to effectively investigate cybercrime and provide support to 
the Office of Director for Public Prosecutions.  
 

 
 
33 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 
Inter-ministerial committee 
The task of the Inter-ministerial committee to ensure high level political control and alignment with National 
Security interests and act as an overall coordinator for the cybersecurity of National Critical Information 
Infrastructure. The Inter-ministerial Committee is the cooperation format that enables to achieve cross-
sectoral agreements and thereby achieve the goals of the current strategy. The MoICT&NG is responsible 
for the monitoring and evaluation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy and will initiate the meetings of 
the Inter-ministerial Committee based on the needs. 
 
The National Information Security Advisory Group (NISAG) acts as coordination mechanism at the 
operative level that involves all relevant stakeholders. NISAG is responsible for fostering information flow 
and cooperation amongst all Critical National Infrastructure operators both in the public and private sectors.  
 
 
National Critical Information Infrastructure (NCII) Regulators 
Sectoral regulators supervise NCII operators within their sectors. Thereby they enforce and take lead of 
the protection of NCII withing their sectors. Regulators monitor compliance and performance of operators 
and support cross sector collaborations and capacity building.   
 
National Critical Information Infrastructure (NCII) Operators 
The role of NCII operators is to assess threats and vulnerabilities in their respective areas, analyse and 
report about cyber incidents and ensure compliance of the relevant cyber laws, policies and standards 
within their organizations. Another role of NCII operators is to design, implement and test institutional 
business continuity and Disaster Recovery Plans, and participate in cyber drills.  
 
Personal Data Protection Office is responsible for the overall enforcement of the Data Protection and 
Privacy Act, ensuring applicable administrative, civil or criminal sanctions and penalties, amongst others.  
3.6.3 Legislative framework 
Collaborative ICT regulatory measures and tools are the new frontier for regulators and policymakers and 
they should work towards maximizing the opportunities afforded by digital transformation across industries. 
Uganda aspires to put its efforts in harmonizing and developing national cyberlaws to achieve the ambitions 
embarked upon by the Strategy. There is a need for designing a legislation that will enable and enforce 
incident reporting both in private and public sectors.  
 
To improve the trust and confidence towards digital transactions and e-services, GoU will enforce the 
adoption of digital standards, laws and regulation that ensure security of online transactions.  
 
3.6.4 Action Areas 
 
To provide enabling framework and modernize legal environment, GoU will:  
a) Modernizing legal framework 
GoU will revise the legislation and bring it in line with the changing cyber and technological 
environment together with the regional and international Conventions to which Uganda has 
acceded. Regulative framework for the protection of National Critical Information Infrastructure 
will be provided to standardize the security requirements and practices for incident and risk 
handling procedures of the NCII operators. All NCII operators shall know, understand and follow 
their responsibilities as a key resource of Ugandas national cybersecurity.  
b) Foster Information Sharing  
Appropriate information sharing mechanisms/requirement for private and public sector will be 
established with legal measures. 
 
 

 
 
34 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
 
Strategic 
goal/pillar 
Strategic Action Line 
Activity 
 Output/KPI 
Lead 
institutions 
Suppor
ting 
instituti
ons/ 
partner
/ 
commit
tees 
Timeframe 
Year 
1 
Year 
2 
Year 
3 
Year 
4 
Year 
5 
Safe 
and 
trusted 
digital 
economy 
Develop 
and 
implement 
digital 
identity to facilitate 
utilization 
of 
e-
services 
 
Promote the usage of 
PKI within GoU IT 
enabled services and 
applications; 
skilled 
SMEs 
as 
well 
as 
enhance in country PKI 
Security 
of 
online 
transactions 
is 
ensured 
NITA-U 
MoICT
&NG 
 
 
 
 
 
Prioritise support for 
SMEs 
Develop 
dedicated 
capacity 
building 
program for MSMEs to 
enhance 
their 
awareness 
in 
cybersecurity and data 
protection  
MSMEs 
are 
aware 
how 
safely 
conduct 
business 
in 
online 
environment. 
MoICT&NG,  
Personal 
Data 
Protection 
Office 
UCC, 
NITA-U 
 
 
 
 
 
Enhance cybersecurity 
web 
portal 
that 
provides guidelines and 
awareness-raising 
materials and initiatives 
focused on MSMEs.  
MSMEs 
are 
aware 
how 
safely 
conduct 
business 
in 
online 
environment. 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-U 
 
 
 
 
 
Threat 
preparednes
s 
and 
response 
 
Promote 
risk 
assessment 
practices based on 
central 
risk 
repository 
Conduct regular threat 
intelligence 
and 
analysis in strategical 
and tactical level.  
Collection 
and 
analysis of the 
information 
about strategic 
threat vectors. 
NITA-U, 
UCC, MoS 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 
Continue the update of 
National 
Information 
Risk Register as both 
national 
level 
and 
sector oriented cyber 
National 
Information Risk 
Register 
is 
adequate, 
updated 
and 
NISAG 
MoICT
&NG, 
sectora
l 
regulat
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
35 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
risk 
repository. 
Improve understanding 
about 
current 
cybersecurity risks and 
allows to observe and 
predict trends.  
ready to use for 
NCII operators. 
ors 
Publish 
regularly 
Cyber 
Threat 
Landscape Report  
 
Publish Cyber Threat 
Landscape 
Report, 
based 
on 
threat 
intelligence 
and 
incident information, to 
improve 
cyber 
risk 
awareness 
and 
establish 
appropriate 
cybersecurity 
measures. 
Ability of MDAs, 
NCII operators 
and MSMEs to 
detect 
cyber 
risks, 
measure 
the risk levels 
and 
establish 
appropriate risk 
controls 
and 
mitigation 
measures 
has 
been improved. 
NISAG 
CII 
regulat
ors, 
CERTs 
 
 
 
 
 
Develop 
central 
incident register and 
sectoral 
incident 
scenarios 
Establish 
the 
mandatory 
incident 
reporting for NCII and 
government sector. 
Develop guidelines for 
incident reporting for 
MDAs 
and 
NCII 
operators.  
Requirements 
and detailed 
guidelines for 
incident 
reporting are 
established 
legally. 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, 
MoJCA, 
UCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish and manage 
an aggregated national 
level incident register. 
National level 
incident register 
is functional. 
NITA-U with 
CERT.UG/CC
, NISAG 
Sector
al 
Respon
se 
Teams 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepare national and 
sectoral 
incident 
resolution plans as a 
part 
of 
national 
emergency 
planning 
and 
crises 
management.  
Preparedness 
for incidents has 
risen 
through 
establishment of 
sound 
incident 
and 
crisis 
management 
plans. 
CII Sectoral 
Regulators 
CII 
Operat
ors, 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 
Strengthen national 
and sectoral CERTs 
Define clearly national 
working arrangements 
between the CERTs, 
Working 
arrangements 
between 
the 
MoICT&NG,   
NITA-U, 
UPF, security 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
36 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
police 
or 
security 
authorities 
for 
information exchange 
and incident response  
CERTs, police or 
security 
authorities 
for 
information 
exchange 
and 
incident 
response 
are 
established. 
authorities 
Promote 
the 
establishment of sector 
specific CSIRTs 
Sector 
specific 
CSIRTs 
are  
established 
MoICT&NG 
 
NITA-
U, 
sectora
l 
regulat
ors 
 
 
 
 
 
Develop 
tools 
for 
information sharing 
Foster 
inter-agency 
cooperation 
between 
security, 
law 
enforcement and other 
government 
agencies 
(Standard 
Operating 
Procedures) 
and 
establish 
a 
Cyber 
Threat 
Intelligence 
information 
sharing 
framework ie provide 
clear rules and safe 
environment 
for 
communication  
Threat 
Intelligence 
information 
is 
shared 
in 
a 
timely 
manner 
between 
relevant 
agencies. 
MoICTNG, 
MoS 
NITA-
U, 
UCC, 
UPF, 
securit
y 
authori
ties 
sectora
l 
regulat
ors 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development 
and 
regular update of large-
scale 
cyber 
incident 
management plans as a 
part 
of 
national 
emergency 
planning 
and 
crises 
management 
Country 
is 
prepared 
to 
resolve 
and 
recover quickly 
from a large-
scale 
cyber 
incident 
sectoral 
regulators 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish programs 
for a capacity 
building in the risk 
management 
 
Establish 
capacity 
building programs for 
sectors that have less 
resources 
for 
cybersecurity such as 
MSMEs, 
healthcare 
Appropriate 
security 
measures 
for 
different sectors 
are 
planned, 
developed 
and 
NITA-U 
MoICT
&NG, 
UCC 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
37 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
institutions etc. 
implemented 
based 
on 
adequate 
understanding 
of the risks 
Conduct regular cyber 
incident 
and 
crisis 
management 
exercises. Participate in 
international exercises. 
 
Cyber 
incident 
and 
crises 
management 
processes 
are 
tested 
and 
effective. 
Uganda experts 
have 
participated 
in 
international 
exercises. 
 
NITA-U, 
MDAs, NCII 
operators, 
sectoral 
regulators 
MoICT
&NG, 
MoS 
 
 
 
 
 
Robust 
cybersecurit
y ecosystem 
Establish a strategic 
plan 
on 
the 
protection 
of 
National 
Critical 
Information 
Infrastructure 
Establish a strategic 
plan on the protection 
of NCII containing the 
criteria 
for 
service 
criticality as well as 
description of impact of 
service disruption. The 
plan includes incentives 
for collaboration with 
the 
identified 
NCII 
operators 
and 
supervision 
mechanisms. 
Update the strategic 
plan regularly based on 
national 
level 
risk 
assessments. 
Supervisory 
authorities, both 
central 
and 
sectoral, 
are 
aware of their 
roles . 
NCII operators 
are 
informed 
and aware of  
of 
the 
cybersecurity 
requirements for 
critical 
infrastructure.  
NITA-U, 
NISAG, 
Sectoral 
Regulators 
MoICT
&NG, 
MoS 
 
 
 
 
 
Promote 
cooperation and 
understanding of 
cybersecurity risks 
in all critical sectors 
Assess 
mutual 
dependences of the 
systems and services of 
various CNII operators.  
Share 
the 
threat 
intelligence 
and 
encourage 
the 
operators to a more 
A 
common 
threat 
intelligence 
is 
shared and NCII 
operators apply 
appropriate 
security 
measures based 
NITA-U, 
NISAG, 
Sectoral 
Regulators 
MoICT
&NG, 
MoS 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
38 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
informed 
risk 
management decisions 
and thereby advocate 
the 
investments 
in 
appropriate 
security 
measures.  
on 
threat 
landscape.  
 
Raise the awareness 
of supply chain 
security risks 
Promote the Security-
by-Design 
practices 
and address the supply 
chain 
cybersecurity 
issues in the framework 
of through awareness 
initiatives. 
National 
Information 
Risk 
Register is updated and 
addresses the supply 
chain 
cybersecurity 
issues. 
Vendors, 
products 
and 
services 
with 
high 
risk 
are 
identified 
and 
communicated 
to 
NCII 
operators. 
National 
Information Risk 
Register 
is 
adequate, 
updated 
and 
ready to use for 
NCII operators. 
NISAG, 
NITA-U 
NISAG, 
Sector
al 
Regula
tors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Start the analysis to 
develop legally binding 
accreditation 
system 
and develop standards 
to assess the security 
of hardware, software 
and 
IT 
services 
deployed in NCII.  
Supply 
chain 
cybersecurity 
issues 
are 
addressed in an 
appropriate 
level 
and 
manner. 
UNBS 
NITA-
U, 
UCC, 
MoICT
&NG 
 
 
 
 
 
Update of the 
minimal 
cybersecurity 
baseline for NCII 
operators 
Update 
the 
requirements 
for 
minimum cybersecurity 
baseline 
of 
NCIIs 
(NISF). Include into the 
baseline 
the 
requirements 
for 
information 
sharing 
and incident reporting. 
Establish the rules for 
regular audit. 
NCII operators 
implement 
security 
measures 
and 
are 
audited 
regularly. 
NCII 
report 
their 
cyber incidents 
to the central 
level. 
Sectoral 
Regulators 
MoICT
&NG, 
MoS 
 
 
 
 
 
Create effective 
governance and 
Introduce 
legal 
provisions that give the 
Sectoral 
regulators 
MoJCA 
MoICT
&NG 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
39 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
management 
structure for 
protection of NCII 
relevant 
sector 
regulators the authority 
and 
resources 
to 
oversee compliance.  
supervise 
NCII 
operators within 
their sectors and 
enforce 
the 
protection 
of 
NCII 
withing 
their sectors. 
with 
sectora
l 
regulat
ors 
Cyber skilled 
Uganda 
 
 
Engrain 
cybersecurity 
through all stages of 
education 
 
Incorporate 
cybersecurity 
in 
educational 
curricula 
across 
primary, 
secondary and tertiary 
levels  
Enhanced 
cybersecurity 
curriculum 
is 
rolled out. 
 
NCDC, 
MoES, 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, UCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrate cybersecurity 
courses in all computer 
science 
and 
IT 
programs 
in 
higher 
education, 
including 
teaching 
computer 
security and forensics 
as a subject or field of 
expertise. 
Cybersecurity 
courses 
are 
available 
in 
computer 
science and IT 
programs 
in 
higher 
education. 
NCDC, 
MoES, 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, UCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Promote collaboration 
between 
educational 
institutions 
and 
develop a framework 
for 
delivering 
cybersecurity 
knowledge throughout 
the education system, 
especially in primary 
and secondary schools  
Framework 
for 
delivering 
cybersecurity 
knowledge 
throughout the 
education 
system 
is 
established and 
their educational 
programs 
are 
updated. 
 
NCDC, 
MoES, 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, UCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Improve 
expertise, 
skills 
and 
competencies  
 
Strengthen 
the 
capacity of the public 
sector institutions.and 
conduct cyber hygiene 
trainings. 
Provide 
networking facilities to 
knowledgeable 
IT 
officers 
across 
Employees 
of 
the public sector 
institutions are 
aware of cyber 
threats, 
apply 
appropriate 
security 
measures 
to 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-U 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
40 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Government MDAs and 
implement the capacity 
building program for IT 
personnel of MDAs. 
their 
ICT 
systems 
and  
use the online 
environment 
safely 
Advocate the creation 
of cybersecurity role  
such 
as 
the 
Chief 
Information 
Security 
Officer in the public 
sector 
institutions. 
Design 
the 
job 
description 
and 
designated trainings for 
future 
Chief 
Information 
Security 
Officers in public sector 
institutions. 
The role of the 
Chief 
Information 
Security Officers 
in public sector 
institutions 
is 
described. 
The trainings to 
are conducted. 
MoICT&NG,
MoPS 
NITA-
U 
 
 
 
 
 
Conduct 
trainings 
within the Justice Law 
and Order and Defence 
Sector on cybersecurity 
and cybercrime related 
areas  
The trainings to 
are 
conducted 
and 
national 
security 
in 
cyberspace 
is 
enhanced  
MoICT&NG, 
ODPP 
NITA-
U, 
UPF 
 
 
 
 
 
Promote 
information 
security 
career 
development 
and 
coordinate 
cybersecurity programs 
between 
various 
educational 
institutions. 
In 
partnerships 
with 
academia, develop and 
implement curriculum 
but 
also 
specialized 
courses 
on 
cybersecurity 
and 
provide 
certification 
schemas for public and 
private sector. 
Specialized 
courses 
and 
certification 
schemas 
on 
cybersecurity 
are provided 
NCDC, 
MoES, 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, 
UCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Raising 
public 
Carry out awareness 
Awareness 
MoICT&NG,  
NITA-
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
41 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
cybersecurity 
awareness  
programs 
to 
cover 
various target groups 
like 
general 
public,  
MSMEs etc. Produce 
best practice guides for 
various 
communities 
and 
sectors 
and 
organise annual events 
like 
Cybersecurity 
Week. 
programs 
are 
developed 
and 
conducted 
for 
dedicated target 
groups with the 
aim to promote 
trust 
in 
e-
government and 
e-commerce 
service and raise 
the general level 
of 
the 
cybersecurity 
culture 
U, 
UCC, 
Sector
al 
Regula
tors, 
UPF 
Conduct capacity skills 
assessment 
of 
NCII 
operators and develop 
comprehensive security 
training and awareness 
program. 
Based on the 
assessment 
dsecurity 
training 
and 
awareness 
programs 
are 
developed 
and 
conducted 
for 
dedicated target 
groups 
NITA-U 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 
Enhance knowledge 
trough research and 
development 
 
Support Research and 
Development programs 
in 
universities 
and 
promote 
the 
development 
and 
commercialization 
of 
intellectual properties, 
technologies 
and 
innovations 
through 
focused research and 
development 
and 
through incubators for 
startups.  
Deepen 
partnerships 
between 
universities 
and the local economy 
and 
establish 
collaborations with the 
Incubators 
for 
enterprises 
dealing with the 
development 
and 
commercializati
on of intellectual 
properties, 
technologies 
and innovations 
are 
provided.  
MoUs 
between 
Academia 
and 
private 
sector 
entities.  
international 
cybersecurity 
research centers  
MoES, 
Academia 
MoICT&NG 
NITA-
U, UCC 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
42 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
cybersecurity industry 
to 
develop 
security 
solutions 
addressing 
the 
country’s 
environment  
Active 
and 
reliable 
partner 
of 
international 
community 
Increase 
both 
bi- 
and 
multilateral 
dialogues  
 
Map existing partners 
and memberships of 
regional 
and 
international bodies as 
well as collaboration 
formats.  
 
Increased 
and 
improved 
partnerships. 
Number 
of 
regional 
and 
international 
organizations 
that Uganda is a 
member of, or 
partners with.  
MoICT&NG 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of 
cooperation 
mechanisms such as 
MoU’s 
with 
regional 
and 
international 
partners to enhance 
the 
cybersecurity 
approach 
and 
fight 
cross-border 
cybercrime 
 
MoUs 
with 
international 
agencies 
for 
mutual 
collaboration to 
fight 
cross 
border 
cyber 
crime 
are 
established. 
MoICT&NG 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 
Building 
capacity 
and 
confidence 
through 
international 
collaboration  
 
Establishing 
national 
collaboration 
formats 
and networks among 
network 
operators, 
academia 
and 
civil 
society organisations to 
identify and take on 
board the needs and 
interests 
and 
to 
forward national input 
in forms of political and 
innovative proposals to 
the 
relevant 
international 
stakeholders. 
 
Enhanced 
international  
collaborations 
on  
cybersecurity, 
and 
improved 
participation of 
relevant national 
stakeholders in 
cybersecurity 
programs 
and 
initiatives 
on 
wider 
global 
arena. Improved 
access 
to 
technical 
MoICT&NG 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
43 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
support 
and 
outreach. 
Develop the necessary 
regulation for Mutual 
Legal 
Assistance 
to 
guide the cross-border 
sharing 
and 
investigation of cyber-
crime. 
Comprehensive 
Mutual 
Legal 
Assistance 
Legislation 
is 
developed 
MoICT&NG, 
MoJCA 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 
Develop 
a 
secure 
information 
sharing 
policy to facilitate the 
cross border sharing of 
cybercrime 
information.  
Secure 
Information 
Sharing 
Policy 
for Government 
of 
Uganda 
is 
developed 
and 
implemented 
MoICT&NG, 
MoJCA, UPF 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 
Promoting calls for 
action 
for 
Responsible 
State 
Behaviour 
in 
Cyberspace 
Drive the process of 
ratification 
and 
accession 
to 
the 
Convention 
on 
Cybercrime 
of 
the 
Council of Europe (The 
“Budapest 
Convention”) and the 
Malabo Convention 
Consultations 
are 
completed 
and conventions 
endorsed 
MoICT&NG, 
MoJCA 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 
Participate 
continuously in cyber  
security initiatives, and 
in the  
development 
of 
regional and  
international 
cybersecurity  
legislation 
and 
regulations. 
Enhanced 
international 
collaboration 
whereas 
cybersecurity is 
a component of 
Uganda’s 
foreign policy 
MoICT&NG, 
MoJCA 
MoFA 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
44 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
Provide 
enabling 
governance 
framework 
Modernizing 
legal 
framework  
Provide the framework 
for the management of 
cyber related risks and 
attacks. 
Standardize 
the 
security 
requirements 
and 
practices for incident 
reporting 
and 
risk 
handling procedures of 
the NCII operators.  
Revised cyber  
legislation 
addressing  
CNII protection 
MoJCA 
MoICT
&NG 
 
 
 
 
 
Foster 
Information 
Sharing 
Establishing 
appropriate 
information 
sharing 
legal mechanisms for 
private 
and 
public 
sector, including the 
requirement of incident 
reporting. 
Threat 
Intelligence 
information 
is 
shared 
in 
a 
timely 
manner 
between 
relevant 
agencies. 
NITA-U, UCC 
NISAG 
 
 
 
 
 
Strengthening 
protection of a 
national Critical 
Infrastructure 
Establish 
transparent 
and up-to-date legal 
basis for the protection 
of 
NCII, 
define 
requirements 
for 
security, 
incident 
reporting and audit for 
NCII operators. 
 
Roles and duties 
of 
NCII 
operators 
are 
transparent and 
supervised 
MoJCA 
MoICT
&NG 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
45 (43) 
[Draft Version for stakeholder consultation] 
 
 

