DECISION
No. 1084, dated 24.12.2020

ON ADOPTING THE NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
STRATEGY AND ITS ACTION PLAN 2020-2025

According to Article 100 of the Constitution upon the proposal of the Deputy Prime
Minister, the Council of Ministers

DECIDED:

1. To adopt the National Cybersecurity Strategy and its Action Plan 2020-2025, according
to the text herein attached, which is its constituent part.

2. The National Electronic Certification and Cybersecurity Authority, the ministries, and
other institutions responsible as provided in the strategy and the action plan shall be charged
with the implementation of this decision.

This decision shall enter into force upon publication in the Official Gazette.

DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
Erion Brage




Official

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
STRATEGY

The National Cybersecurity Strategy, which
should have been attached to decision No.
1084, dated 24.12.2020 of the Council of
Ministers “On adopting the National
Cybersecurity Strategy and its Action Plan
2020-2025”, and published in the Official
Gazette no. 233, dated 30.12.2020.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I: STRATEGIC CONTEXT
1. INTRODUCTION
2. ASSESSMENT OF THE CURRENT
SITUATION IN ALBANIA
Cybersecurity Situation
Cybersecurity legal framework
Safe internet for children
Education, research, and training in the field
of cybersecurity
3.STRATEGY VISION
VISION
Impact indicators and outcome indicators
PART II: POLICY GOALS AND
SPECIFIC STRATEGY OBJECTIVES
4. Policy goal 1: Ensuring cybersecurity at
the national level through the protection of
information infrastructure, and strengthening
technological and legal tools
Specific objective 1: Improving the legal
framework providing norms and_ regulating
cybersecurity in the country, and aligning this
framework with European Union directives and
regulation
Specific objective 2: Establishing and
operation of CSIRTs in all industry sectors
nationally
Specific objective 3: Strengthening and
implementing security measures in critical and
important information infrastructure

Specific objective 4: Enhancing
information infrastructure to combat
cybercrime, radicalization, and violent
extremism

5.Policy goal 2: Developing a_ safe
cyberspace educating and raising awareness in
the society regarding professional capacity
building in the information security field

 

Specific objective 1: Professional capacity
building in the information security field through
revision of education curricula

Specific objective 2: Awareness raising and
professional skills building on cybersecurity in
public and private institutions

Specific objective 3: Raising society
awareness on cybersecurity and cyberthreats

6.Policy goal 3: Developing mechanisms
required for child safety in cyberspace, while
preparing the younger generation to benefit
from the advantages of technology and
overcome development challenges

Specific objective 1: Strengthening the legal
framework to improve child online safety

6.2. Specific objective 2: Preventing child
online sexual abuse through awareness-raising
and the creation of a safe online browsing
space

6.5. Specific Objective 5: Strengthening
cross-sector cooperation for the protection of
children online

7. Policy goal 4: Improving national and
international cooperation with strategic partners
in the cybersecurity field

Specific objective 1: Strengthening
institutional cooperation at the national level

Specific objective 2: Strengthening
international cooperation in the cybersecurity and
defense field and countering violent extremism
and radicalization

PART IV: IMPLEMENTATION,
INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES,
ACCOUNTABILITY

PART V ACTION PLAN AND
FINANCIAL RESOURCES FOR
IMPLEMENTATION

Activity costing methodology
Budget and financial resources for action
plan implementation

PART I: STRATEGIC CONTEXT

1. INTRODUCTION

The development of the internet and
technology innovation changes over the recent
decades have resulted in fundamental changes
and challenges in every society worldwide. Our
daily lives, human rights, economies, and
social interaction are deeply impacted by
information and communication technologies.
A common and

Pagell485


Official

open cyberspace promotes social and political
engagement, breaks down communication
barriers between countries, communities, and
citizens, and ensures transparency, allowing
interaction with and exchange of information
and ideas in real-time worldwide. All the
developments and growing use of information
and communication technologies have brought
great benefits, but also threats, which makes
cyber defense and security-critical.

Various groups and individuals with
malicious interests perpetuate continuous
efforts in the cyberspace, which impact the
progress and functioning of states. Privacy
breaches and identity theft are also increasing
and highly concerning problem for society at
large.

On the one hand, the government is
increasingly investing in digital infrastructure
to provide digital services to citizens. On the
other hand, the public is increasingly using the
internet because of the advantages it offers.

As a developing country, Albania relies on
information technology as well, intending to
improve the quality of life and public services.
Alongside the advantages of using new digital
technologies, internet use also has its issues
related to cybersecurity. Cyberthreats are on
the rise, taking advantage of technological
weaknesses or lack of knowledge inadequately
using these tools, thus threatening information
systems security.

One of the current and ongoing challenges
in many countries is the building of a
developed digital society, which is
cybernetically protected, equipped with the
required knowledge and skills to maximize
benefits and manage risks.

Under the “National Security Strategy 2014-
2020” and the “Cybersecurity Policy Paper
2014-2017”, Albania has taken important steps
to improve its cybersecurity situation.
Alongside the developments in the technology
and information field, and the public services
digitalization revolution, the legal framework
on cybersecurity was completed and improved
upon. Due to this progress, Albania has
improved its rank in the Global Cybersecurity
Index

Pagell 486

 

compared to 2017 from 89" to 62™ globally
and top 36" in Europe.

However, this process has not yet reached
the change scale and pace required to stay
ahead of the fast-moving evolution of the
various cyber threats. Cybercrime is
undoubtedly one of the major threats to modern
global security and for this reason,
cybersecurity has become an important part of
national security. For this reason, the National

Cybersecurity Strategy 2020-2025
development is a _ necessity for the
establishment of the relevant institutional
mechanisms that will improve the

cybersecurity level in the country.

This strategy will be based on the following
core principles to meet government
commitments and to be incomplete coherence
with the strategic developments in developed
countries:

- application of the same core values in both
the physical and digital worlds;

- fundamental rights, freedom of
expression, personal information, and privacy
protection;

- access for all;

- democratic and effective governance;

- joint responsibility in guaranteeing
cybersecurity.

2. ASSESSMENT OF THE CURRENT
SITUATION IN ALBANIA

The current cybersecurity situation in

Albania was evaluated in cooperation with the
relevant institutions and is based on the
following 4 pillars:

1.Cybersecurity situation;

2.Cybersecurity legal framework;

3.Safe internet for children;

4. Education, research, and
cybersecurity

2.1. Cybersecurity situation

2.1.1 Critical information infrastructure

The “National Security Strategy” adopted in
2014 has provided the national framework and
pillars to increase security in the country. Being
a developing country without the necessary
cybersecurity legal infrastructure, this field has
only been developing in the last two years in
Albania, over which critical and

training on


Official

important information infrastructure has been
identified in the public and private sectors. ,
besides, minimum security measures to be
implemented for better cybersecurity in this
infrastructure have been developed along with
the development of a methodological
mechanism for sector CSIRT establishment and
operation at the national level.

The legal framework on _ electronic
communication security is completed with
legal provisions on the security and integrity of
electronic communication networks and
telecommunication networks covered by Law
No. 9918, dated 19.5.2008 “On electronic
communication in the Republic of Albania” as
amended, which has transposed EU directives
on electronic communication.

The cybersecurity legal framework has also
designated the National Electronic Certification
and Cybersecurity Authority (NECCA), as the
authority responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the law.

As a result, after the implementation of the
law on security, the current critical information
infrastructure situation in the banking sector
has improved compared to two years ago.
Considerable security measures, approved by
NECCA have been applied in _ this
infrastructure, and sector CSIRT shas been
established, creating a safe cyberspace.

In the financial sector, cybersecurity is
divided into two pillars, the public and the
private, and the current situation is as follows:

Security measures according to the
applicable legislation and in compliance with
the ISO 27001 standard are applied in critical
government information infrastructure used by
public institutions, allocated in the government
data center, and managed by the National
Agency on Information Society. NAIS is a
government sector CSRIT and was certified in
2018 for this standard, and ISO 27001 standard
policies are applied to any government
infrastructure managed by NAIS.

Critical infrastructure managed by private
operators is currently being identified and in
some cases, the investment to develop them is
also being identified.

 

In the health sector, which is also divided
into the public and private pillars, the
cybersecurity situation is as follows:

Measures approved according to the law on
security have been applied in critical
infrastructure managed by public
operators/institutions, which has led to
improved cybersecurity levels. Besides, groups
responsible for managing and_ addressing
incidents, which did not exist when the legal
framework was absent, have also been
established.

The private operator managed. information
infrastructure, considered to be critical
infrastructure as defined by the European
Commission legal framework on information
networks and. infrastructure, have not been
identified and the situation study conducted by
the relevant authority found that they do not
meet security. elements that critical
infrastructure should guarantee.

Energy Sector Currently, all generation,
transmission, and distribution energy system
operators are implementing innovative
technologies based on computer systems and
data transmission networks, to manage and
optimize their technological processes.
SCADA systems are implemented or are
planned for implementation in all three sectors
of the energy system, and they have their
operation, computer system, and data
transmission centers. Along with reading and
analyzing energy system data remotely,
operation modules automating processes that
are currently completed manually by operators
are planned for implementation in the near
future. Transitioning to independent systems
that operate automatically will certainly require
the implementation of security measures and
policies, since the impact of cyber-incidents
would be great. This will certainly require
energy operators to pay special attention to
system security and to develop internal
procedures and human capacities for
cybersecurity when planning ICT projects and
automation.

Pagell487


Official

In the transport sector, which is composed
of three pillars, the situation is as follows:

Critical information infrastructure related to
air transport meets minimum security rules
obligations and sector CSIRT has been
established in the relevant sector.

Critical information infrastructure in road
transport does not meet any minimum-security
rules obligations, including the establishment of
the relevant CSIRT.

Information infrastructure in maritime
transport, which is considered critical
infrastructure in the meaning of the legal

framework adopted by the European Commission
on networks and infrastructure is yet to be
identified.

Besides, critical information infrastructure in
the water supply sector, which is managed by
local governance, has yet to be identified as such
in the meaning of the applicable legislation on
cybersecurity and no security measures are
applied in this regard.

Considering that the majority of cyber threats
and cyberattacks are perpetrated through
electronic communication networks,
cybersecurity issues in the digital infrastructure
and electronic communication networks and/or
services are covered and are under the
responsibility of the Electronic and Post
Communication Authority (AKEP). According to
article 122 of Law No. 9918, dated 19.5.2008
“On Electronic Communication in the Republic
of Albania” and Regulation No. 37 dated
29.10.2015 “On Technical and Organization
Measures to guarantee Electronic
Communication Network and/or Services
Integrity”, AKEP requires adequate technical and
organizational measures to be put in place by all
electronic communication entities operating
under the General Authorization Regime to
guarantee electronic communication networks
and/or services security and integrity for all
services they provide to their subscribers,
including DNS services. AKEP has conducted
and continues to periodically conduct inspections
and audits in entities, to verify the establishment
and implementation of the relevant technical and
organizational security measures, and in
cooperation with NECCA it follows up on
security incidents reported by electronic

Pagell 488

 

communication businesses. AKEP is the “al”
domain administrator and has authorized 8
businesses as accredited registries to provide
domain name registration services under the .al
domain (TLD name registries).

With the inclusion of this service in the critical
and important information infrastructure list,
the registries accredited by AKEP to provide .al
domain name registration services will also be
subject to the provisions of regulation No. 37
“On Technical and Organization Measures to
guarantee Electronic Communication Network
and/or Services Integrity”.

Internet penetration in Albania is. still
ongoing and the country currently has mid-
level internet use. Some 67% of the population
and some 40% of households had internet
access in 2019.

2.1.2 Cybercrime

Similar to other countries, Albania is often a
victim of malicious cyber activity perpetrated
by criminal actors, including state and non-
state actors that can use network infrastructure
in the country and abroad. Alongside the
improvement of internet services, Albania has
also experienced the rise of various forms of
cybercrime. The most common forms of
cybercrime dominating in Albania include
fraud-related to internet banking such as
phishing and spam. Even when those
responsible for cybercrime against the Republic
of Albania are identified, it is often difficult for
law enforcement agencies in the Republic of
Albania and international organizations to
persecute when they are located in restricted
jurisdictions.

Currently, there is a lack of necessary tools
to obtain general cyber intelligence, using
human and logistical resources available for
law enforcement activities.

For this reason, it is fundamental to increase
capacities to address cyber challenges, which in
turn requires a change in structures, approach,
technical and logistical capacities, etc.

An important step forward in legislation
development and measures were taken against
cybercrime will also be the first national
cybercrime strategy, which will be


Official

developed by the relevant authorities and will
be put into action in a relatively short time.
This document will define the methods for
combating cybercrime in the cyberspace and
will provide more adequate tools for this fight.
Cybersecurity legal framework

A comprehensive national approach to
cybersecurity cannot be achieved through the
use of technologies and services alone, and it
should be accompanied by a proper and current
legal framework focusing on the dynamic
nature of the ICT space and the evolving nature
of cyberthreats.

Various national and international structures
have organized awareness-raising campaigns
for various stakeholders on protecting from
threats resulting from cybercrime and other
attacks against internet safety.

A legal and regulatory framework protecting
from various forms of electronic crime and
abuse is fundamental to the establishment of a
reliable environment for electronic
communication and transactions.

The main laws related to cybercrime are the
following:

Law No. 7895, dated 27.1.1995, “Criminal
Code of the Republic of Albania”, as amended;

Law No. 2/2017, “On cybersecurity”;

- Law No. 9918 dated 19.5.2014, “On
Electronic Communications in the Republic of
Albania’, as amended;

Law No. 9887, dated 10.3.2008,
Personal Data Protection”, as amended;

- Law No. 8457, dated 11.2.1999, “On
Classified Information”, as amended;

Law No. 9880, dated 25.02.2008 “On the
Electronic Signature”, as amended;

- Law No. _ 107 dated 15.10.2015, “On
Electronic Identification and Trusted Services,”
as amended.

Regarding the above, legislation in the
cybersecurity field should be harmonized with
EU legislation, thus creating

“On

a complete and codified mechanism to
adequately address and resolve issues.

Besides, where possible, international
internet security mechanisms should be
accessed, signed, ratified, and implemented,

 

including the allocation of sufficient resources
based on national priorities and considering
technological developments and applying the
neutral technology principles.

Safe internet for children

The increasing use of the internet by
children is the greatest issue regarding their
online safety, not only in Albania. Child online
safety is one of the priorities for Albania and
all institutions focusing on this issue in their
activity.

In 2018-2019, the government’s main and
strategic partner in child protection and rights,
UNICEF Albania conducted a study on
“Children’s experiences of internet use in
Albania””, which surveyed 1000 children
between the ages of 9 and 18 and their parents,
and its preliminary results found the following:

Surveyed children accessed the internet for
the first time at 9 years of age, with 37%
stating that they used the internet at 8 years of
age or even earlier. 51% of children
interviewed have permanent access to the
internet (whenever they wish).

In general, children interviewed use the
internet more and have more _ online
technological skills than their parents. This
creates an obstacle for parents in effectively
overseeing child experiences on the internet,
not only as regards controlling access but also
to help children in developing a critical
judgment of their online experiences and
content.

The study found that during their time
online, children have had upsetting situations.
Namely, 14% of children interviewed have had
upsetting experiences online, especially those
between 15 and 17 years of age. 1 in 10
children reported at least one unwanted sexual
experience through the internet.

The statistics of this research show that
children are exposed to harmful content online,
such as images of violence or abuse (1 in 5
children),

79 The “Children’s experiences of internet use in
Albania” will be published in 2019 by UNICEF Albania.
Its preliminary findings were presented in the “VIRAL”
Summit, organized by UNICEF Albania in November
2018: https://www.unicef.org/albania/viral-summit-
better-Internet-children-and-adolescents-albania

Pagell489



Official

content discussing physical violence (17% of
children) or content discussing suicide (1 in 10
children). 1 in 5 children has been subjected to
denigrating and hate messages, which is also an
indicator of possible online bullying situations.

Besides, the study shows that children find it
difficult to distinguish the difficult situations
they experience and to ask for help: 1 in 5
children never told anyone about what upset
them, while 75% of children interviewed asked
their peers and not adults for help and support.

Over 20% of children interviewed accept all
friend requests on social networks, while 25%
of children say they have interacted online with
someone they don’t know, and 16% of them
have met in real life someone they only knew
online. Parents are aware of only 9% of the
abovementioned cases.

Children interviewed note they are under no
control or supervision from their parents when
watching videos online (78%), when using
social networks (58%), when using texting
apps (57%), or when using the computer or
telephone web camera (56%).

As the study notes, the uncontrolled use of
the internet by children is at a very high level.
Often this results in grave consequences. Lack
of parental information regarding the risks of
unsafe internet is also at high levels.

Even though some internet service providers
offer the technical possibility to apply parental
controls, they are not applied. Besides, a study
of the situation in 7 regions of the country,
using information from  awareness-raising
campaigns with some 12,000 middle school
children, found that the majority of children
confirm that their parents do not have clear
information on the risks of unsafe internet use
by children.

Another study conducted in 2019 by
UNICEF Albania entitled “WebFactor’80 has
found

so UNICEF Albania, 2019, WebFactor: Assessment
of the legal framework and institutional readiness to
address child sexual exploitation and abuse

Pagell490

 

a series of legal and institutional gaps, which
hamper the efficient guarantee of child safety
online.

The study found that even though the
Albanian legislation is overall in line with
relevant international standards on child sexual
abuse, it is often fragmented and lacking very
important definitions related to child sexual
abuse, their engagement, and coercion to
participate in sexual and other improper acts.
The principle of protection from harmful and
illegal content online is hindered by two
factors: 1. The definition for harmful material
is very general and leaves much space for
individual judgment; and 2. The lack of clear
definitions for child exploitation in sexual acts
makes the identification of illegal acts difficult.

Another important finding is related to the
Albanian legislation regulating the operation of
internet service providers, which is unclear
concerning charging of administrative
authorities the competencies to block or delete
specific materials. This does not allow these
authorities to clearly understand their role and
functions, and to have appropriate mechanisms
to exercise them. Clear legislation on the exact
administrative authorities’ competencies and
procedures is necessary for this field.

When considering criminal investigation and
prosecution for cases of online sexual abuse
with children, the study notes that neither the
police nor the prosecution is fully equipped
with the adequate infrastructure to effectively
investigate online child abuse cases. The
cybercrime investigation unit of the State
Police lacks the resources to undertake active
online surveillance, thus hampering their ability
to start ex officio and proactive investigations.
The failure of internet service providers to
quickly react to the requests of the prosecution,
and difficulties in identifying alleged
perpetrator IP addresses, gravely impact the
overall quality and efficiency of the
investigation, and

online in Albania
https://www.unicef.org/albania/sq/deklarata-
shtypi/faktoriweb-vler%C3%ABsimi-i-kuadrit-ligjor-
dhe-gatishm%C3 %ABris%C3%AB-institucionale-

p%C3%ABr



Official

consequently, the possibility to bring
perpetrators to justice.

The study shows that Child Protection Units
and other professionals dealing with child
protection online need capacity development
and support in handling online child abuse.
Besides, there are no specific online child
abuse data that have been collected or
published.

24. Education, research, and training in
the field of cybersecurity

In developing countries, human resources
with adequate skills and qualifications in
cybersecurity have proven to be one of the
most difficult challenges as regards the
implementation of a national level CSIRT and
the improvement of the overall national
cybersecurity situation. Ensuring an adequate
level of education, research, and training on
online safety, and supporting the internal needs
of professionals regarding cybersecurity is
critical.

Several study programs in the field of
cybersecurity are offered by higher education
institutions, but they are in their first steps and
more effort is required to reach an adequate
level. Besides, no cybersecurity research
initiatives have been undertaken in Albania.
The knowledge gained by students in
universities is insufficient to meet labor market
requirements in this field. Furthermore, even
academic staff has its issues in covering the
entire range of this field.

As a_ result, developing appropriate
cybersecurity curricula and _— enhancing
academic staff knowledge is an immediate
necessity to meet market demand.

On the other hand, human_resources
capacity development through dedicated
training in the cybersecurity field in the public
administration and all other public sectors is
another necessity that public institutions should
consider.

Besides, a common approach is required for
the education of the government staff and the
public regarding safer practices on
cybersecurity awareness.

3.STRATEGY VISION

 

Vision
Guaranteeing cybersecurity in the Republic
of Albania through the establishment and
operation of interactive institutional
mechanisms, legal and technical instruments,
and critical cyberspace protection elements for
digital infrastructure, transactions, and
electronic communication; through the
development of professional _ capacities,
nationwide awareness, and_ strengthened
national and international cooperation for a
safer digital space.
Impact indicators
indicators
The National Cybersecurity Strategy will be
monitored by measuring core indicators
defined in the indicator Passport annex. The
core indicators, which will serve as a road map
for the Strategy implementation monitoring,
were developed to track the achievement of
specific objectives translated into a detailed

and outcome

action plan.

The indicators were developed to be
understandable, measurable, and _ easily
compared over the monitoring periods. Two

core indicators were developed for each
specific objective, which can be simple or
complex depending on the sub-objectives they
are measuring.

PART II
POLICY GOAL AND
STRATEGY SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES

The Government of the Republic of Albania
will achieve the following goals to improve the
cybersecurity level in the country:

Guaranteeing cybersecurity at a national
level through the protection of information
infrastructure, while strengthening
technological and legal tools.

Establishing a safe cyberspace, raising
awareness in society, and developing
professional capacities.

Developing mechanisms required for child
safety in cyberspace, while at the same time
preparing the younger generation to benefit
from the advantages of information technology
and overcome development challenges.

Pagell491


Official

Improving national and international
cooperation with strategic partners in the
cybersecurity field.

4. Policy goal 1. Ensuring cybersecurity at
the national level through the protection of
information infrastructure and
strengthening technological and legal tools.
The rapid developments across the sectors of
the economy, heavily based on technological
innovation as well, makes it difficult for
decision-makers to understand and mitigate
risks related to the use of information and
communication technology. These risks are a
common global responsibility and include
national and international perspectives.
Domestically, the common _ responsibility
included the industry, and the administration,
and the citizens.

Development and implementation of
policies and tools to establish a_ safe
communication space, is the most valuable
component for cybersecurity incident
management and secure electronic transactions
in the domestic market, intending to guarantee
safe electronic interaction between public
authorities, citizens, and businesses, thus
improving the effectiveness of online public
and private services, and electronic business
and commerce.

The digital space is sensitive: information
systems and networks may be impacted by
security incidents, such as human error, natural
causes, technical faults, or attacks. These
situations are increasing in number and are
becoming ever more complex and may lead to
great financial losses and impact the wellbeing
of the society overall.

Establishing trust in the online environment
is the key to economic and social development.
Lack of trust, especially because of the
perceived lack of cybersecurity leads
consumers to hesitate in using electronic
transactions.

Specific objective 1: Improving the
legal framework providing norms and
regulating cybersecurity in the country and
aligning this framework with European
Union directives and regulation.

Security authorities in the country have
developed the legal basis for their activity.

Pagell492

 

However, even though even though laws,
secondary legislation, regulations, and standards
have been developed, the analysis conducted and
the evaluation of the cybersecurity maturity level
in the country, found the need to revise the entire
legal and regulatory framework achieve complete
alignment with European Union directives, and to
achieve domestic institutional coordination.

This specific objective aims at harmonizing
the Albanian legislation on cybersecurity with the
EU legislation. Besides, a national procedure will
be developed for action in case of extraordinary
situations created by cyber crises.

Sub Objectives:

Improving cybersecurity regulatory framework
in line with sector laws, to appropriately address
and resolve issues including, but not limited to
IoT, 5G technology, artificial intelligence.

Continuously adapting standards and rules to the
developments of the cybersecurity field.

Meeting engagements undertaken regarding
cyberspace as a member country of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Defining a national procedure for extraordinary
situations created by cyber crises, taking concrete
measures to resolve the situation in real-time.

Specific objective 2: Establishing
and operation of CSIRTs in all industry
sectors nationally

According to the law “On cybersecurity” and
the obligations provided therein, and to guarantee
information and communication system security,
there is an obligation to dynamically identify
critical and important information infrastructure
and then establish incident response teams
(CSIRT). Currently, the initial measures for the
establishment of these teams in some of the
infrastructure defined by a relevant decision have
been taken, but this is a continuous process
monitored by NECCA.

Achievement of this policy | objective will be
measured with the number of established
CSIRTs. All critical and important information
infrastructure operators should have their relevant
CSIRT, which should meet minimum
requirements and be audited by NECCA.


Official

Sub Objectives:

 

Conducting critical and important information

Creating optimal work conditions for CSIRT infrastructure  self-assessments to measure
operation, in line with the duties to guarantee cybersecurity maturity levels.

cybersecurity in critical and important
information infrastructure.

Building CSIRT capacities through training

and cyber drills.

Specific objective 3: Strengthening
and implementing security measures in
critical and important information
infrastructure

Based on the assessments made in 2018 to
2019 by the authority responsible for
cybersecurity, a major task for critical and
important information infrastructure remains
increasing and strengthening the
implementation of security measures. Public
and private organizations should improve their
procedures and develop cyber defense strategic
plans against cybercrime or cyberattacks, and
risk management plans in case of such attacks.
The objective of this Strategy is to stimulate
and obligate all critical and important
information infrastructure to develop strategic
plans in case of cyberattacks and to take
measures to withstand these attacks and to
recover the damages or eliminate these attacks.

The achievement of this specific objective
will require all critical and important
information infrastructure operators that have
their CSIRTs, to implement specialized
systems for the identification, prevention,
analysis, and damage recovery of cyberattacks,
and to learn lessons for the future. Besides,
operators should conduct risk management
analyses and self-assessments on the level of
cybersecurity maturity in the infrastructure they
manage.

Sub Objectives:

Using advanced hardware and_ software
solutions to identify, prevent and manage cyber
incidents.

Analyzing critical and important information
infrastructure to assess their risk management.

Developing strategic plans to protect
cyberspace from potential incidents.

Specific objective 4: Enhancing
information infrastructure to combat
cybercrime, radicalization, and _ violent
extremism.

On the one hand, the internet leads to the
development of society and facilitates quick
procedures and access to data, but on the other,
it is a tool for malicious individuals/groups to
perpetrate cybercrime or to radicalize
individuals from vulnerable or marginalized
groups for extremist purposes and to commit
punishable offenses. Concerning this, public
and private organizations should take a series
of measures to combat, control, and minimize
these activities.

To achieve this, the development of
mechanisms to regulate and provide safe
internet in public spaces is aimed. Besides, the
aim is to cooperate with civil society
organizations and businesses to control and
identify polluting elements circulating online
and threatening cybersecurity in the country.
In this context, mechanisms to monitor the
abovementioned phenomena will be developed.

Sub Objectives:

Monitoring and preventing phenomena that

stimulate violent extremism and _ radicalization
among vulnerable groups in cyberspace.

Continuously identifying polluting elements

circulating online and threatening cybersecurity in
the country.

Developing mechanisms to regulate safe

internet in public spaces, certified by the
regulatory entity for the cybersecurity field.

Developing the capacities of the authorities

responsible for fighting cybercrime.

Increasing regional cooperation in the fight

against cybercrime.

5. Policy goal 2: Developing a safe cyber
space educating and raising awareness in the
society regarding professional capacity
building in the information security field

Pagell493


Official

Ensuring professional skills and capacities
to respond to and manage cybersecurity
incidents is no longer just an option in our
times.

Building capacities in the cybersecurity field
aims at responding as effectively as possible
against cybercrime. This is an integral
component of the international cooperation that
could improve harmonization with the EU
vision for a global, open, free, and safe
cyberspace for all, ensuring respect for human
rights.

The methods used to develop capacities and
raise the awareness of the society are
fundamental in determining the effectiveness of
establishing a safe space.

Specific objective 1: Professional capacity
building in the information security field through
revision of education curricula.

Sub Objectives:

Developing higher education study programs
in the cybersecurity field, to developsa new
generation of cybersecurity experts.

Developing recommendations for the
integration of safe internet related information
into university curricula.

Improving research and innovation capacities
in the cybersecurity field.

Specific objective 2: Awareness
raising and professional skills building on

cybersecurity in public and _ private
institutions.

Sub Objectives:

Training for central and local level

administrative staff to enhance knowledge on
cybersecurity based on the field dynamics.

Business research and innovation capacity
building and support through the establishment of
cybersecurity scientific research centers.

Building CSIRT capacities at the national and
executive public administration level through
training and cyber drills.

Pagell494

 

5.3 Specific objective 3: Raising society
awareness on cybersecurity and cyber threats.

Sub Objectives:

5.3.1 Awareness-raising campaigns on
cybersecurity with various stakeholders,
using adequate means of realizing them
including audiovisual and social media,
organized by the authority responsible for
cybersecurity.

5.3.2 Establishing an online education
platform on cybersecurity to raise awareness
among various age groups in the society on
safe internet use and digital infrastructure.

6. Policy goal 3: Developing
mechanisms required for child safety in
cyberspace, while preparing the younger
generation to benefit from the
advantages of information technology
and overcome the challenges from the
recent developments.

Providing safe internet for children and
youth in Albania remains one of the strategic
objectives of the Albanian government, as also
stated in the National Agenda for the Child
Rights 2017-2020. The internet,
smartphones, and several other information
technologies have become a part of the daily
lives of a considerable number of children.
The family (parents), peers and the school are
three spaces where children socialize, while the
digital space has become the fourth. For them,
the distinction between online and offline is
becoming increasingly blurred and they shift
incessantly between the two spaces. Child
protection online requires specific and
articulated actions. At the same time, child
protection should be proportional to the risks
children face, and they should not restrict the
use of information technology for child growth,
education, and development. Government
policies should create a digital space that is
responsive to the needs of children while at the
same time guaranteeing the protection and
respect of their rights. Thus, taking immediate
steps to create safe digital spaces is paramount,
while also guaranteeing


Official

the respect for their rights and the fulfillment of
all children's development potential.

6.1 Specific objective 1:
Strengthening the legal framework to
improve child safety online

Sub Objectives:

6.1.1 Development of a dedicated legal
framework on collecting incident data on reported
cases of online violence, bullying, and abuse of
children in schools.

6.1.2 Improvement of the Criminal Code,
aligning it with the international legislation on
child protection from online sexual abuse.

6.1.3 Amendment to the criminal procedure
provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure and
adoption of regulatory acts providing for criminal
acts related to child sexual abuse, and for relevant
procedures and time frames to improve
investigation effectiveness, case priority, and
evidence analysis in connection to child sexual
abuse cases online or through communication
technologies.

6.1.4 Legislation completion and clarification
regarding notice and take down procedures, and
blocking of illegal materials online.

6.2 Specific objective 2: Preventing
child sexual abuse online | through
awareness-raising and the creation of a safe
online navigation space

Sub Objectives:

6.2.1 Developing and establishing programs
for internet safety awareness-raising in the
education system.

6.2.2 Establishing and supporting the ICT
teachers’ online network to promote children’s
protection online issues.

6.2.3 Establishing safe internet public spaces
for children and their families through initiatives
to provide both free access to and filtered
information to protect children and youth from
abusive content online.

6.2.4 Application of filters in public and
private schools to prevent child access to harmful
and illegal websites, and continuous information
for ICT teachers on incident reporting.

 

6.2.5 Identification, support, and promotion of
talents in developing technical solutions tackling
online protection and safety.

6.3 Specific objective 3: Effective
investigation and bringing perpetrators of
cybercrime against children to justice,
focusing on sexual abuse and exploitation

Sub Objectives:

6.3.1 Ensuring technical means to
assist police and relevant bodies in analyzing and
uncovering cases of online violence, especially
those related to child sexual abuse materials with
children

6.3.2 Establishing training programs for the
judiciary, prosecution, and police officials
regarding child protection online and
cybersecurity, including evidence of digital use
and mutual legal assistance.

6.3.3 Developing a courses system at the
School of Magistrates and the Security Academy
on cases related to crimes against children online
and methods for protecting them online.

6.3.4 Developing standardization mechanisms
for digital forensic evidence analysis work for the
dedicated cybercrime structures at the Albanian
State Police.

6.3.5 Establishing a working group with the
participation of State Police cybercrime structures
and industry to resolve issues of investigating and
identifying persons suspected of abusing children
online, focusing especially on the identification of
end-users through IP addresses.

6.4 Specific objective 4:
Awareness raising and education for all
segments of the society regarding safe
internet use for children

Sub Objectives:

64.1 Awareness-raising campaigns with
parents and educators on the risks and issues
children face online.

64.2 Developing training programs for ICT
teachers regarding safe internet issues.

6.4.3 Developing training programs for Child
Protection Workers regarding case management
of children in need of protection in which the risk
of violence, abuse, exploitation, or neglect is
connected to the internet or information
technology.

Pagell495


Official

65 Specific objective 5:
Strengthening cross-sector cooperation for
the protection of children online

Sub Objectives:

6.5.1 In cooperation with ISPs, promoting
existing mechanisms for child safety online, that
are applied in their platforms.

6.5.2 Integration of the IWF (Internet Watch
Foundation Hash List) List, which prevents
anyone from uploading, downloading, or viewing
child sexual abuse images or videos in all Internet
Service Providers platforms, and providing access
to this list for State Police cybercrime
investigation structures.

6.5.3. Establishing a Technical Advisory
Committee for Child Safety Online, within the
National Council for Child Rights and Protection.

7. Policy goal 4: Improving national
and international cooperation with strategic
partners in the cybersecurity field

Coordination and cooperation among all
actors are the core element to guarantee
success. Cooperation with the private sector
should be strengthened because of the
Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) rapid development dynamic. ICT
security and development in the _ state
administration can only be enhanced with close
cooperation and in coherence with technology
developments and __ trends. Increased
cooperation and coordination between state
institutions will be strengthened to guarantee
interaction and coordination in strengthening
security and minimizing damages from
cyber-attacks.

Albanian endorses and will be a part of
international initiatives aimed at improving and
strengthening security. Cooperation with
NATO and the EU will be specially
strengthened by becoming part of common
cybersecurity initiatives. Albania’s
membership in internationally recognized
cybersecurity organizations and forums and
improved cooperation are priorities.

In the quality of NATO member country,
Albania recognizes cyberspace as the fifth
domain of warfare, along with land, sea, air,
and

Pagell496

 

space. Cyberspace presents challenges and
security in this domain is only achieved by
thinking globally and working closely at the
international level.

Specific objective 1: Strengthening
institutional cooperation at the national
level

Sub Objectives:

Increasing cooperation and _ coordination
among state institutions to guarantee cyberspace
security at the national level.

Establishing a tool for information exchange
between dedicated contact points in relevant
institutions, in case of cyberthreats.

Establishing a flexible structure with the best
cybersecurity experts in the country to provide
support in case of cyber crises, and national level
cybersecurity level testing and assessment.

7.2 Specific objective 2: Strengthening

international cooperation in the
cybersecurity and cyber defense field and
countering violent extremism and
radicalization

Sub Objectives:

721 Developing effective mechanisms
and procedures for international cooperation in
case of cyber incidents, attacks, and crises,
based on internationally defined principles.

7.2.3 Strengthening cooperation and
information exchange with NATO/OSCE and
other international organizations/forums.

PART IV IMPLEMENTATION,
INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY,
ACCOUNTABILITY

The development of the National
Cybersecurity Strategy 2020-2025 is based on
the European Union Cybersecurity Strategy
and is a continuation of the Cybersecurity
Policy Paper 2015-2017.

- A participatory and comprehensive
methodology with all public institutions
contributing to cybersecurity in the country was
used, providing a large number of stakeholders
with the opportunity to contribute.


Official

- The strategy was based on EU and other
international organization commitments and
standards, and on the two assessments conducted
by ITU and the Oxford University with the
support of the World Bank.

-The engagement of public and private
organizations allows this Strategy to be
objective and implementable. The inter-
institutional working group and all the
stakeholders involved in the consultation process
provided valid comments leading to a series of
draft revisions, intending to adopt a
comprehensive strategy where everyone takes
ownership and contributes to guaranteeing
cybersecurity in the country.

- This Strategy is not just for the institutions
but is also a strategy that stimulates and supports
cyber protection for individuals, citizens, and
especially children as the future of this country.
It also identifies measures to not only fight
cybercrime, but also incitement of terrorism and
violent extremism through the cyberspace.

The action plan accompanying the National

Cybersecurity Strategy 2020-2025 was
developed based on the following:

a)findings and recommendations of the
Cybersecurity Policy Paper 2015-2017

implementation assessment report;

b) findings and recommendations from the ITU81
and Oxford University82 assessment reports;

c) Public institutions budget plans for the
2020 to 2022 period.

As provided in the specific objectives and
main activities proposed in this Strategy and the
Action Plan, the coordinating role should be
taken by the National Electronic Certification
and Cybersecurity Authority in cooperation with
the National Agency for Information Society.

Besides, this document considers the
obligations stemming from the European
integration process, the recommendations made
in this regard by the NIS Directive and the EU
adaptations for ENISA as EU CERT, and the
relevant commitments as a NATO member
country.

81
https://cesk.gov.al/Publikime/2019/Albania_Assessment

ReportITU.pdf
82

https://cesk.gov.al/Publikime/2019/AlbaniaCMMReport.
pdf

 

After having been assessed and completed by the
inter-institutional working group responsible for
developing the Strategy, all proposed
measures/activities were further detailed during
the review of financial effects resulting from the
implementation of this National Strategy and its
Action Plan 2020-2025, establishing the need to
review biannually based on the sector
development dynamics.

Any institution responsible for activities
should plan for their realization guaranteeing
earmarked budgets, human resources, and
technical capacities for their implementation.

An annual assessment will be undertaken to
review activity implementation and identified
objectives achievement, based on indicators met.
Institutions _ responsible for implementing
activities and achieving results must report
following reporting standards. The Strategy
Coordinator should develop and publish the
annual report.

PART V
ACTION PLAN AND FINANCIAL
RESOURCES FOR IMPLEMENTATION

Activity costing methodology

The expenditures required for the NAP
implementation have been determined through a
costing of the activities in this action plan. The
methodology used to develop these costs presents
a combination of the methods that can be used in
multi-actor strategies.

The main methodology used is the Activity-
Based Costing — ABC, where the responsible
institution and the sources for covering costs are
identified for each activity, and resources are
allocated for all products and services based on
the actual consumption for each activity

The budget was developed based on the cost
of each activity reflected in the action plan, the
length and frequency of its implementation, and
the number of beneficiaries per activity.

The following methodology has been used to
estimate costs for the main activities:

-The estimation for human_resources
expenses is based on the estimated time required
to implement the activity and an average daily
wage for a given category of civil servants.

Pagell497


Official

- Services expenses estimation.

Service costs in the relevant institutions
based on adopted standards were considered
for these activities.

- Costing of activities related to the
development and review of legislation,
monitoring, and functioning of permanent
structures, etc.

Estimations for these activities consider
running expenses incurred for example for
salaries, Social Security contributions,
international expertise (when planed), and
consumables.

- Estimation of expenses for activities
related to studies, awareness-raising
campaigns, training programs, foreign
expertise, etc., was based on specific similar
initiates and the nature of activities and market
costs for such services.

- In estimating training expenses, the
training cost per person was considered. ASPA
costs and/or costs applied to similar training in
the past were used as cost units.

Pagell498

 

- For activities, information on which was
not complete (such as projects or studies), an
analogy method for costing is applied, meaning
that expenses for similar activities included in
previous budget programs were considered.

Budget and financial resources for action
plan implementation

The Nation Cybersecurity Strategy will be
implemented during the 2020-2025 period.
The expenses required for each activity,
specific objective and policy goal have been
costed to enable the implementation of this
strategy.

The overall budget for the implementation
of the Strategy is reflected in various forms:

- The overall budget per year for each
activity, specific objective, strategic goal and
funding sources

- The Budget is detailed according to
activity, financing source and_ institutions
responsible.


















