NATIONAL
CYBERSECURITY 
PLAN 2022

MESSAGE

My warmest greetings to the Department
of Information and Communications
Technology (DICT) on the launching of the
National Cybersecurity Plan 2022.

Your department plays a crucial role in the
government's efforts to address the
challenges brought about by global
interconnectivity. | commend the DICT for
crafting this Cybersecurity Plan which aims
to deal with these challenges and
improve our people's confidence in

the ICT sector.

May the implementation of this new cyber-
security framework enable you to fulfill your mandate of securing critical
ICT infrastructure while ensuring personal data privacy and confidentiality.
It is my hope that you will use this framework in realizing your role in nation-
building through the creation of a cybersecurity educated society.

| wish you all the best in this endeavor.




MESSAGE

The Philippine government has invested in Infor-
mation and Communications Technology (ICT)
infostructure and applications as the corner-
stone for national economic growth. ICT is rec-
ognized as key enabler for social mobilty and
economic growth and is expected to improve
the quality of life of people as part of the long-
term Vision for the Philippines AmbisyonNatin
2040 and the ASEAN Masterplan of 2015. Though
there is the promise of acceleration in the na-
tion's growth via the rapid development of ICT in
Philippines, this technology and their applications
have introduced new types of threats such as
cybercrime, cyber espionage, cyber terrorism and
cyber warfare to mention a few. Cyber threats
are on the rise, and are sophisticated and difficult
to mitigate; the imminent threat of cyber crimes to National Security necessitates
that the government must be prepared and in position to respond and counter
adequately these cyber threats.

Given the Philippines’ heavy dependence on ICT to support its economic devel
opment goals, it is imperative that information infrastructure or “infostructure”,
among others, be resilient, robust, and secure against cyber threats. The National
Cybersecurity Plan 2022 was crafted to establish an environment that will assure
trust and confidence in everyone while using ICT facilities, and ensure that the Phi-
ippines is self-reliant and able to protect its interests, particularly national security.
This plan will guarantee the availability of cyber services and the confidentiality
and integrity of information processes, assets, and sensitive information of Individu-
als, Businesses, and Government itself.

Pursuant to RA 10844, the Department of Information and Communications Tech-
nology shall ensure the security of critical infostructure, including information assets
and data of the government, individuals, and businesses. The Department is work-
ing in collaboration with key stakeholders in Cybersecurity, especially the Cyber-
crime Investigation and Coordination Center, and the Department of National
Police. As the lead in the formulation of cybersecurity policies, the Department will
periodically review their implementation progress to ensure that threats of current
and potential cyberattacks are addressed adequately and effectively in a timely
and appropriate manner.




MESSAGE

As we become more and more dependent
on ICT in our daily lives, an equal responsibility
to provide online security should be
established. Through the NationalCybersecu
ity Plan, the DICT is providing a roadmap for
ICT stake-holders to secure their online env+
ronment. It is the government's strategy to
safeguard the ICT environment of the country
which will prepare and secure the govern-
ment infostructure , systematically strengthen
critical infostructure (Cll) for resiliency, use se-
curity measures among businesses to protect,
prevent, respond, and recover from attacks
especially within Cll and government sup-

ply chains, and raise awareness of cyber risks
among users for empowerment in adopting
the right norms in Cybersecurity.

Accepting the reality that there is no physical or economic security with-
out cybersecurity, the Department of Information and Communications
Technology is now officially enforcing the National Cybersecurity Plan 2022
hereby sending a message that the government is at the forefront of pro-
tecting every Filipino in cyberspace.




MESSAGE

The constantly changing times have drast+
cally altered the way we perform our duties
and responsibilities with the advent of ICT.
There are certain groups whose ideology is
to destroy the order of our nation and are
now using advanced and sophisticated
technologies to carry out their plans, thus, the
need to develop measures in protecting and
policing the cyberspace has now become
one of the major responsibilities of the DICT to
assure the Filipino people of its safe use
especially in doing business.

The DICT is mandated to establish cyberse-
curity measures that would guard the country against cyber threats. The
department will be in the frontline to protect Philippines’ critical
infostructure, government and military networks, businesses and supply
chains, and the Filipino people through the crafting of a comprehensive
and realistic national cybersecurity plans, policies and programs. DICT
will enforce, evaluate, and constantly monitor these cybersecurity
policies through regular assessment and compliance activities, conduct
of annual cyber drills and exercises, and cybersecurity education and
awareness programs.

As cyberspace is borderless in nature, international cooperation will be
at the highest possible level to curb cyber threats and aid our law
enforcement authorities, prosecution services, and cyber defense
centers through the establishment of the National Computer Emergency
Response Team (NCERT) that would act as the focal entity to achieve a
safe and resilient cyber community.

Let us be together in the fight against cyber threats as CyberSecurity is
not just a whole of government approach but of the whole Filipino
nation.




MESSAGE

| congratulate the Department of Informa-
tion and Communications Technology (DICT)
for crafting the National Cybersecurity Plan
(NCSP) 2022.

Online connectivity has been transformed
from a luxury and privilege to a necessity for
the Filipino people. However, the govern-
ment has been slow in providing Philippine
cyberspace with the proper measures and
safeguards that would enable the general
public to conduct their businesses and
expand their knowledge using online means,
without facing security risks. This is why the
NSC considers cybersecurity as an important part of national security.

One particular importance of cybersecurity is connected with how the
government should deal with security issues on government issued
documents. This is because in our interconnected society, the integrity of
these documents-which more or less prove our right to be recognized as
Filipino citizens-have become terrifyingly vulnerable to malcontents and
our identity could be compromised as a result.

Cybersecurity comes in by ensuring that the database would be
impervious to cyber attacks and pilferage of data. Ensuring that
cybersecurity is in place and addressed by the Philippine government
also has implications on our economic security. Other governments and
businesses would have more confidence in our processes, businesses,
and government if we have more robust and responsive cybersecurity.

In this regard, | look forward to the eventual implementation of the NCSP
2022, as well as to closer cooperation of the NSC and the DICT on mat-
ters of mutual concern.

Mabuhay!




MESSAGE

Our One Defense Team extends warm felici-
tations to the Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT) for having
formulated this well-crafted National Cyberse-
urity Plan 2022.

Having set forth the DICT’s policy direction
within the National Cybersecurity Strategy
Framework, this plan shall serve as a guide on
how you can best fulfill your mandate of en-
suring the privacy and confidentiality of our
citizens’ personal information; and securing
critical ICT infrastructure and information

: assets of the government, individuals and busi-
nesses. It shall also improve your provision of oversight functions to agen-
cies governing and regulating the ICT sector, strengthen consumer protec-
tion and welfare, ensure data privacy and security, and foster completion
and growth of the ICT sector.

We cannot overemphasize the urgency of protecting the nation’s critical
information structures especially government public and military neworks,
to ensure continuous operations even during crises and emergencies.Thus,
we are one with you in instituting measures to enhance our ability to
respond to cybersecurity threats before, during, and after attacks.

Rest assured of our efforts to assist the DICT in informing and educating our
people on cybersecurity, not only in the workplace but also in our homes,
communities, and other places where we access the Internet. This is the
first step toward instilling cybersecurity consciousness in every Filipino so
that we can all contribute in building a safe, secure, and cyber-resilient
nation.

Once more, congratulations to the DICT on the significant accomplish-
ment!

Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay tayong lahat!




MESSAGE

| extend my warm congratulations to the
Department of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (DICT) on the crafting and
publication of the National Cybersecurity
Plan 2022.

This Plan is most welcome as it sets the direc-
tion in addressing the urgency to protect the
nation’s critical infostructure, government
networks, business enterprises, corporations
and their supply chains, and most of all,
every Filipino using the Internet. This publica- m"
tion comes at this most opportune time when RONALD M DELA
information and communications technology
is developing and advancing at a rapid pace and playing an increas-
ingly crucial role in the lives of our countrymen.

| take this opportunity to assure the DICT of the strong support and
cooperation of the Philippine National Police (PNP) in the implementation
of cybersecurity measures and policies and in continually improving and
strengthening the nation’s response to the increasing threats to peace
and security being posed over cyberspace.

| lead the men and women of the PNP in forging a stronger partnership
with the DICT as we endeavor to keep Philippine cyberspace safe and

secure.

More power to the DICT! Mabuhay kayo!




CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction
Scope
The Cyber Threat Landscape
Global and Regional Threat Landscape
The Philippine Threat Landscape
Sources of Threats
The National Strategic Context
The National Cybersecurity Plan 2022
The NSCP 2022 Vision
Strategic Initiatives
The National Cybersecurity Framework
The Guiding Principles
Roles and Responsibilities
Key Areas for Cybersecurity
Classification of National Security System
Risk Management Approach
Strategic Collaboration
Key Strategic Initiatives
Key Program Areas
Protection of Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll)
Protection of Government Networks
Protection of Supply Chains
Protection of Individuals
Active Approach
Identify
Protect
Detect
Respond
Recover
Proactive Approach
Defend
Deter
Develop
Metrics
Conclusion
Glossary



TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

AFP
GICE
Cll
CISO
DDoS
DICT

loT
ISSP
LEA
NCERT
NCIAC
NCSP
NIST
NSC
NSS
NTC
PDCA
RAT
SWIFT

Armed Forces of the Philippines

Cybercrime Investigation and Coordination Center
Critical Infostructure

Chief Information Security Officer

Distributed Denial of Service

Department of Information and Communications Technology
Information and Communications Technology

Internet of Things

Information Systems Strategic Plan

Law EnfoDevelopment Life Cycle

National Computer Emergency Response Team

National Cybersecurity Inter-Agency Committee

National Cybersecurity Plan

National Institute of Standards and Technology

National Security Council

National Security System

National Telecommunications Commission

Plan — Do — Check — Act

Remote Access Trojan

Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Communication






EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

communications technology (ICT)

have drastically altered the way
we live. There are growing dependen-
cies on these technologies that include
critical functions of industries and industry
control systems. The newly created
Department of Information and Com-
munications Technology, through its
attached agency, the Cybercrime Inves-
tigation and Coordination Center (CICC),
adapts to the new paradigm with the
comprehensive National Cybersecurity
Strategy Framework.

Te rapid changes in information and

The development of the Framework

shall institutionalize the adoption and
implementation of Information Security
Governance and Risk Management
approaches. These globally recognized
standards shall provide the government
a systematic and methodical practice

of ensuring the protection of our mission
critical and non-critical infostructure. The
government shall build its capability and
capacity for quick response and recovery
through the establishment of the National
Emergency Response Team (NCERT).

Included in the mandates of DICT are to
“ensure the rights of individuals to privacy
and confidentiality of their personal
information; ensure the security of

critical ICT infrastructures including
information assets of the government,
individuals and businesses; and provide
oversight over agencies governing and
regulating the ICT sector and ensure
consumer protection and welfare, data
privacy and security, foster competition
and the growth of the ICT sector.” One of
the priority areas that the Department has
to immediately institute is the formulation

of the National Cybersecurity Plan to ad-
dress the urgency to protect the

nation's Critical Infostructures, Govern-
ment Networks both Public and Military,
Small Medium Enterprises to Large
Businesses and Corporations and its supply
chains, and every Filipino using the
Internet.

The primary goals of this Plan include: (1)
assuring the continuous operation of our
nation's critical infostructure, and public
and military networks; (2) implementing
cyber resiliency measures to enhance

our ability to respond to threats before,
during, and after attacks; (3) effective
coordination with law enforcement agen-
cies; and (4) a cybersecurity-educated
society.

I. Making Critical Information
Infrastructure (Cll) Trusted and Secure

The functions and services of critical
infostructure and those of the governmen-
tal bodies are vital to the country’s
socio-economic activities. Any interrup-
tion of these functions and services can
cause direct and significant consequenc-
es to people's safety and security; there-
fore, it is crucial to take precautionary
measures to address potential threats. It

is necessary to take “mission assurance”-
based approaches. Mission owners should
analyze risks and should have discussions
with asset owners in order to accomplish
the functions and services of critical
infostructure or the governmental bodies.
Mission owners should ask comprehensive
decisions of senior executives by providing
information on vulnerabilities including
resultant risks.



Il. Making Government Information
Environment Secure

To respond to cyberattacks, particularly
targeted ones that are apparently aimed
at stealing, damaging, or altering
information, the agency will take
government-wide, multtlayered
measures based on the assumption of
cyberattacks. This must also include con-
tingency plans for this possibility — a
certain entity will be used as a spring-
board for another entity that is the
original target of a cyberattack. In
promoting these measures, the Govern-
ment will ensure that they are based on
common internationally accepted
standards for the governmental bodies,
and will conduct risk analysis on its
administrative responsibilities to optimize
the processes involved in making govern-
ment information environment secure.

IIL Making Businesses Secure

Along with the continuous increased
interconnectivity of cyberspace and
physical space, the number of cyberse-
curity incidents closely related to
individuals and enterprises — such as
illegal money transfers by exploiting
Internet banking, stealing information by
targeted attacks, and phishing — has
drastically grown. There is also a rise in the

number of breaches of personal or
confidential information, including a
large-scale personal data breach. Thus,
such repeated crimes have become
serious social concerns. Without avanced
cybercrime response and investigative
capabilities, it is difficult to capture the
reality of malicious cybercrimes; to
control cybercrimes appropriately in
accordance with laws and statutes; and
to be ready to handle new methods of
cybercrimes that would likely emerge in
the near future.

IV. Making Individuals Aware and
Secure

In the current environment, cyber risks
have become more complex and
diversified and Internet users with insuffi-
cient cybersecurity awareness become
victims or end up becoming offenders
unknowingly.

Therefore, the Internet and the advent

of mobile technology have increased
utilization of computers, smartphones,
and other devices to transact, process,
transmit, and store information. The public
awareness and knowledge of cybersecu-
rity should reach sufficient mass to pro-
pagate the concept that cybersecurity
starts with the individual.






INTRODUCTION

The rapid development on Information
and Communications Technologies
(ICT) created a vast environment for
vertical, as well as horizontal
challenges and opportunities. Data
and information can now travel at the
speed of light. The world has become
interconnected through supercom-
puters and massive network systems
and the Internet superhighways, in a
way that is almost unimaginable. This
created cyberspace. The internet has
introduced many drastic changes in
our lives. This is apparent in the way we
process and communicate our
information to transact, interact, and
connect with other people.

The digitization of our society has also
created new sets of paradigms of
dependencies and interdependen-
cies. The government has recognized
the importance of information and
the vital role of information and com-
munications technology as one of the
enablers for nation building. The

growing dependencies of the gov-
ernment in ICT to deliver its essential
services have brought home the hard
facts that we must have a robust and
resilient infrastructure. Our computer,
information, and network systems must
be given priority to ensure that the
integrity of our cyberspace is not put in
jeopardy as we entrust our data and
our information into this virtual environ-
ment.

Although there is an implemented
government-wide program on
Information Systems Strategic Plan
(ISSP) which provides the blueprint for
planning, developing, building, and/or
acquiring technology such as
hardware and software applications
for each government agency, the
design has never incorporated the
security aspect on top priority in
facilitating the creation of a digital
environment. Therefore, individuals
with malicious intent are able to
discover the gaps between these



Making Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll) trusted and secure
Making government information environment more secure
Making business more secure
Making individuals aware and secure

systems and are able to exploit it.
Addressing these gaps will mitigate
the risks, threats, and vulnerabilities
from malicious actors such as crimi-
nals, terrorist organizations, individu-
als, or even hostile states.

The technological revolution on
mobile-based devices and smart
systems and the expansion of inter-
networking of devices, computing
systems, and mechanical and digital
machines for connectivity through
Internet (also known as Internet of
Things or lol) introduced a whole
new host of threats into our cyber-
space. As we rely heavily on systems
(e.g. banking), technologies (e.g.
telecommunications), and infrastruc-
ture (e.g. power grids) to conduct
the daily activities of our lives which
are connected to the internet, these
are potentially vulnerable to interfer-
ence or disruptions.

Recognizing all these issues and
challenges that may be a potential
threat to our national security and
national interest, the National
Cybersecurity Plan 2022 has been
prepared to address the cyber
threats and create innovative mea-
sures that will lead to a secure and
resilient Philippine cyberspace.

In comparison with our neighboring
countries, the state of our cybersecu-
rity is still at its infancy stages.

However, the NCSP 2022 shall pro-
vide the institutional framework and
foundation where policies and initia-
tives will be developed, formulated,
and prepared. Just to name a few,
we also have several legal instru-
ments such as the Cybercrime Pre-
vention Act, E-Commerce Law, and
the Data Privacy Act that provide
the mechanisms for enforcing laws
and provision of penalties and
regulating through policies and
guidelines.

Launching on these objectives, the
DICT has identified and shall focus its
attention on four national targets
and make them a national priority.

The scale and dynamic nature of
cyber threats mean we need to work
harder to develop our capabilities
and defenses. A comprehensive
approach is required to effectively
secure our cyberspace. To have this
realized, investments on interven-
tion and measures must be prepared
through initial assessment of where
we are now and what we have.



SCOPE

The National Cybersecurity Plan 2022
is intended to shape the policy of the
government on cybersecurity and
the crafting of guidelines that will be
adapted down to the smallest unit

of the government. The strategy also
intends to provide a coherent set of
implementation plans, programs, and
activities to be shared to the public
and the private sector, the civil
society, and the academe, including
the private individuals.

The strategy covers the entire country
including all Philippine networks
connected through government
networks, domestic and international.
The strategy also mandates that all
government and public systems shall
be assessed and must be classified
under the National Security System.

The nexus of the cybersecurity
strategy is anchored on the last three
clauses under Section 2 of the
Republic Act No. 10844, to wit, “(I) to
ensure the rights of individual to
privacy and confidentiality of their
personal information;(m) to ensure the
security of the critical ICT infrastruc-
tures including information assets of
the government, individuals, and
businesses; and (n) to provide
oversight over agencies governing
and regulating the ICT sector and
ensure consumer protection and wel
fare, data privacy and security, and
foster competition and growth of the
ICT sector.”

Therefore, the context of cyberse-
curity within this document refers to
the protection of information systems
(hardware and software including
associated and support infrastructure),
the data within these systems, and the
services that are provided by these

systems from any unauthorized access,
harm or misuse, whether it includes in-
tentional or accidental, or from natural
disasters.

The above definition is reflective of the
definition of cybersecurity! from the
International Standards on Guidelines
for Cybersecurity (ISO/IEC 27032:201 2),
“preservation of confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of information
in the Cyberspace”, which
incidentally was also adopted from
the International Standards on
Information Security Management
System (ISO/IEC 27000:2014). For the
purpose of this document, it shall
adopt the definition from ISO/IEC
27032:2012.

Thus, Information Security, Application
Security, Network Security, Internet
Security, and Cll Protection are cen-
tral to the key areas of developing the
cybersecurity plan of the government.
The objective of this document is set
to share the vision of the Government
for cybersecurity in 2022 and the key
objectives to achieve the goal, inclu-
ding the guiding principles, roles and
responsibilities of all key players and
the stakeholders.

THECY BER THREAT LANDSCAPE

To understand better the threat that
we are now facing in the digital age,
the black market having a pivotal
role in cyber threats is discussed briefly
within this section.

The criminal underground opera-
ting with the use of the web is highly
fragmented. Each organized criminal
group offers specialized expertise on
certain services and each actively
offers said services on the deep web.

8



A report from Trend Micro? indicat-
ed that there are at least six different
cybercriminal ecosystems that are
actively operating across Europe,
North and South America, Africa, and
Asia.

Each of these criminal ecosystems
offers unique and specialized services
in the black market. Stiff competition
in the Russian black market pushes up
the game. The sellers provide goods
in the shortest amount of time, with
the most efficiency. The Russian black
market is one of the pioneers in the
underground economy and provides
support to budding counterparts such
as Germany.

The Japanese underground on the
other hand is still relatively new in the
cybercrime economy. It prefers to
cater more on taboo rather than on
the typical illegal trade that occurs in
the black market and is only exclusive

to specific members. However, as it
learns more of the “benefits” anony-
mity offers, the Japanese under-
ground market now boasts uncom-
mon offerings such as leaked data
search engine privacy protection
services.

The Chinese underground economy
sells both software and services similar
to its counterparts. The economy has
a robust offering of tools and hard-
ware development and acts asa
prototype hub for criminals.

The North American underground
encourages novices to jumpstart a
career in the criminal world. This type
of criminal ecosystem is not exclusive
to members like the Japanese and

is unlike the tech-savvy hackers like
Russians, Germans, and Chinese.
Unlike its US counterpart, the Canadi-
an underground prefers to sell fake or
stolen documents and credentials.



The German underground market
functions similar to the Deep Web
where it offers various wares and
caters to a niche set of customers.
Although it is also still relatively new,

its Russian counterparts provide them
support, such as shared resources and
parallel sites as well as cross-market
advertising.

For any young criminal aspirant, the
Brazilian underground market provides
the avenue to reach instant superstar-
dom for notoriety. They mostly focus
on banking Trojans. Most of these bud-
ding cybercriminals are young and
bold enough to flaunt and operate

on the “Surface Web” by frequenting
popular social media sites. However,
they mostly work independently from
one another.

GLOBAL AND REGIONAL
THREAT LANDSCAPE

This section mentions two most promi-
nent cases in 2015 and 2016 respec-
tively, as an example to emphasize
the importance of the Critical Informa-
tion Infrastructure? (Cll) in our nation.

Any attack can erode our trust in the
system that we rely heavily on to pro-
vide continuous service without disrup-
tions or interruptions.

On December 23, 2015, a disruptive*
cyber-attack on the electricity distribu-
tion companies Prykarpattya
Oblenergo and Kyiv Oblenergo in
Western Ukraine’ occurred and
caused a major power outage. The
region experienced a blackout for
several hours affecting more than
220,000 consumers. Upon investigtion,
six months before the attack, phishing
emails were sent to the offices of
power utility companies in Ukraine
which contains malicious Microsoft
Office documents. The malware was
able to gather intelligence and man-
aged to obtain credentials that al
lowed the attackers fo gain direct
remote control of aspects of the
network and open the circuit breakers
that subsequently enabled the attack-
er to trigger the outage.

In February 2016°, an attacker was
able to access the SWIFT (Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Com-
munication) payment system of the
Bangladesh Bank and instructed the

10



New York Federal Reserve Bank to
transfer money from an account in
Bangladesh Bank to multiple accounts
in the Philippines. These fraudulent
transactions led to a loss of US$101
million when these were completed
and went through the payment and
transfer system of the bank. However,
the banking system was able to
prevent the attempted transactions to
defraud an additional US$850

million. After the discovery of the
attack, a forensic investigation was
launched and the discovery was
made that a malware was installed

in the bank's systems and had been
used to gather information on the
procedures used by the bank for
international payment and fund trans-
fers. Further analysis also indicated
that the malware linked to the attack
showed a sophisticated functional

ity for interacting with the local SWIFT
Alliance Access software running on
the Bangladesh Bank infrastructure. It
was concluded that the conduct of
the criminals are geared towards more
sophisticated attacks on network

intrusions.

The Components of Malicious
Cyber Activity
In the “Economic Impact of Cyber
Crime and Cyber Espionage” re-
port by McAfee, a global computer
security software company, the count
in estimating losses from cybercrime,
cyber espionage, and malicious cyber
activity was broken down into six parts
¢ The loss of intellectual property
and business confidential information
* Cybercrime, which costs the
world hundreds of millions of dollars
every year

¢ The loss of sensitive business infor-
mation, including possible stock
market manipulation

* Opportunity costs, including ser-
vice and employment disruptions, and
reduced trust for online activities

¢ The additional cost of securing
networks, insurance, and recovery
from cyber attacks

* Reputational damage to the
hacked company

Put these together and the cost of cy-
bercrime and cyber espionage to the
global economy is probably measured
in the hundreds of billions of dollars. To
put this in perspective, the World Bank
says that global GDP was about $70
trillion in 2011. A $400 billion loss—the
high end of the range of probable
costs—would be a fraction of a per-
cent of global income. But this begs
several important questions about the
full benefit to the acquirers and the
damage to the victims from the cumu-
lative effect of cybercrime and cyber
espionage’.

THEPHILIPPINE THREAT
LANDSCAPE

This section of the document provides
a background on the early initiatives
that the government has undertaken
to start establishing security in our
cyberspace as well as citing cases of
threats and recent breaches into the
government system.

The Context of Cybersecurity in the
Philippines

The dynamic and fluid changes in the
cyber environment make the chak

11



To adapt to the fluid state of changes
of the information and communica-
tions technologies, the Internet and
cyberspace, the Philippine Congress
passed into law on May 23, 2016 the
Republic Act No. 10844 which is The
Creation of the DICT.

Under R.A. 10844, it paved the way for
a National Agency to focus and ad-
dress ICT-related issues and matters. In-
cidentally, the Cybercrime Prevention
Act of 2012 (R.A. 10175) which constt
tuted the creation of the Cybercrime
Investigation and Coordinating Center
(CICC) and the National Privacy Com-
mission which was created through the
Data Privacy Act of 2012 (R.A. 10172).

In the creation of the DICT, the Nation-
al Telecommunications Commission
(NTC), the CICC and the NPC were
placed under the Department as af-
tached agencies.

The Threats

On March 2016, the server of the Philip-
pine Voters’ Database was reportedly
hacked by Anonymous Philippines in
which at least 54 million sensitive data®
was leaked into the Internet, including
1.3 million passport numbers of Filipi-
nos working overseas. According to
common news articles reported by
various newspapers, the breach into
the system occurred through the use
of SQL injection. The alleged hacker
was arrested by the National Bureau of
Investigation after the IP address was
discovered and tracked down.

In 2016, at least 68 government wesites
have been subjected’ to attacks in-

cluding attempts of hacking, deface-
ment, and Distributed Denial of
Service or DDoS.

The Philippines is no stranger to being
a victim of cyber-espionage. A Finland
based security firm reported'® in 2016,
that a malware was found targeting
confidential information of govern-
ment and private organization. The
malicious virus called Remote Access
Trojan (RAT) is often disguised as an
innocent file but once it has been
opened, it releases a virus into the
victim's computer and gathers intek
ligence to be sent back to the at-
tacker.

SOURCES OF THREATS

Cyber criminals

There are two interrelated forms of
criminal activity that increase the risks
of the potential threat against informa-
tion assets of government, public, and
private sectors and trickles down to
ordinary individuals:

Cyber-enabled crimes

These are traditional crimes that are
perpetuated, magnified, and in-
creased in scale or reach through the
use of computers, computer networks,
and other forms of Information and
Communications Technology or ICT
(e.g. cyber-enabled fraud and data
theft).

Cyber-dependent crimes

These are crimes that can be com-
mitted through the use of ICT devices.
These devices become an instrument
for both committing the crime and the
target of the crime (e.g. hacking to
steal data, developing and propaga-
ting malware to be used to intrude and
breach systems for financial gains, dis-
ruptions of network systems, etc.).

13



Most of the organized cybercriminal
groups operating in the South East Asia
Pacific region are hosted by the
criminal marketplace services in
Central Asia, South East Asia, as well
as West Africa. It is also difficult for

the Philippines and international law
enforcement agencies to prosecute
them when there is limited jurisdiction
or no extradition agreements.

Malware that are developed and
deployed are increasingly advancing
and their impacts are not fully
documented in the Philippines as we
have yet to establish a National
Database for computer incidences.
The increasing use of ransomware and
threats of distributed denial of service
(DDoS) are just examples of how these
cybercriminals are becoming increas-
ingly aggressive and confrontational.

Hacktivist

Hacktivist groups are motivated by is-
sue and mostly function in decentrak
ized fashion. Some schools of thought
are espousing the idea that web
defacement and replacing them with
political messages is an exercise of
their freedom of speech. They select
their targets based on their perceived
grievances. There is a vigilante qua-
lity to their acts, as demonstrated by
the hackers who attacked a certain
government website. Their methods of
attacks are mostly defacement and
distributed denial of service (DDoS).
However, some hacktivists are able to
inflict greater and often lasting
damage to some of their victims.

14



Script kiddies

Attention has not been fully given to
these so-called script-kiddies, but they
are threats nonetheless. They are gen-
erally less skilled individuals. However,
if they know how to access the black
market, there are services and even
hacking guides available and can be
accessed through the Internet. How-
ever, these script kiddies have not
been fully assessed in terms of the
damage and impact they can effect
towards their target organizations.

Terrorists

Terrorists operate with specific intent
and motive and that is to create cha-
os and terror to the public. Some ter-
rorists use the Internet as an effective
recruitment tool for vulnerable target
groups or individuals. Although their
technical capabilities are generally
low, the low sophistication of their dis-
ruptive activity (defacement or DDoS)
will have an impact even in moderate
scale. Furthermore, as they exploit the
Internet to recruit talents and even ex-
change technical skills, the opportunity
of being able to enlist an established
insider is likely to increase as well.

Non-State and State-sponsored threats
Countries with technical capabilities
to attack other states are increasing.
The first world countries are most prone
to frequent attacks. However, other
countries like the Philippines may be
used as launch pads to attack oth-

er states either by another state or
through state-sponsored attacks.
Developed nations continuously

improve their capabilities to deflect,
defend and deter these attacks ata
steady pace. But by the same token,
states with technical capability to
attack these developed nations, often
use basic tools and techniques against
vulnerable targets frequently exploiting
discovered gaps between the systems
of these states because of poor de-
fenses. These attacks are no longer
confined within espionage but there
are hostile threat actors that have de-
veloped and deployed cyberattacks
with destructive objectives. Therefore,
all states are at risk and can have their
national security threatened from po-
tential attacks through the Cll

and overriding the industrial control
systems. Thus, the Philippine Govern-
ment through DICT shall mandate that
Cll protection and security are priori-
tized by Cll owners following the mini-
mum guidelines that shall be set by the
National Government based on the
plan.

Insiders

Insiders and trusted employees are at
the top of the food chain that is fre-
quently exploited by criminal groups,
terrorists, hacktivists, or non-state and
state-sponsored attackers through
social engineering, clicking on phish-
ing email, plugging infected USB into
a computer, or ignoring security pro-
cedures of the organization. Although
some may be unintentional actions,
their privileged access to the systems
and data can create as much ad-
verse impact and damage to the
organization.

15



THE NATIONAL
STRATEGIC CONTEXT

THE NATIONAL
CYBERSECURITY PLAN 2022

This section covers the general details
of the strategy, including the
implementation plan for NCSP, since
this document shall be the blueprint
for the protection of the Cll of the
government, public and private
networks. The strategy is still a work

in progress and will be reviewed for
improvement on a regular interval
concurrent with its implementation. It
will follow the PDCA Cycle (Plan — Do
— Check — Act).

However, the priority program areas
will be the starting point in establishing
and working towards the goal of
reaching a mature cybersecurity
state. Results in the implementation
of the plan shall be monitored closely
and regularly. Data shall be collected
from stakeholders and shall be
collated into a national database for
incidences on cyberattacks, intrusion
attempts or disruption of systems, and
other sources of threats whether
intentional or accidental.

Initial metrics that have been pre-
pared and proposed within this
strategy shall be agreed upon by the
stakeholders to create ownership and
involvement among everyone. The
following sections describe the
general areas that will be prioritized.



THE NSCP 2022 VISION

The National Cybersecurity Plan 2022
shares its vision to reach the state of
having a “Trusted and Resilient Infostruc-
ture.” In order to accomplish this state, the
following mission objectives have been
determined:

a. To systematically and methodically
harden the Critical Information
Infrastructure (Cll) for resiliency;

b. To prepare and secure government
Infostructure;

c. To raise awareness in the business
sector on cyber risk and use of security
measures among businesses to prevent
and protect, respond and recover from
attacks; and

d. To raise awareness of individuals on
cyber risks among users as they are the
weakest links, they need to adopt the
right norms in Cybersecurity.

Metrics shall be developed to monitor
the implementation progress of the plan
based from the above objectives. There
are three guide questions that will aid in
jumpstarting the cybersecurity strategy of
government agencies. The strategy can
be replicated and adopted by agencies
as it is rolled out and cascaded to the
smallest unit of the government.

i. Where are we now? (Conduct of
inventory of information assets, informa-
tion systems, computer systems, network
systems, and security systems)

ii. What do we want to achieve?
(Setting, aligning, and harmonizing
cybersecurity targets of each agency
with NCSP)

ii. How do we get there?
(Establishing the roadmap)

STRATEGIC INITIATIVES

The strategic initiatives of the government
focus on the technical, administrative and
procedural measures. The strategy shall
cover strategic programs for:

a. Enhancing security resilience of the Cll
and government, public, and military
networks to deal with sophisticated
attacks;

b. Increasing efforts to promote
adoption of cybersecurity measures
among individuals and businesses; and

c. Growing pool of cybersecurity
experts.

THE NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY
FRAMEWORK

In the development of the National
Cybersecurity Framework, one has to
understand the interrelationship'' between
cybersecurity and cybercrime. Cybersecu-
rity and cybercrime can be distinguished
in the context of the law. Cybersecurity
relates to the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of computer systems, network
systems, information systems, and other
areas related to the protection of infor-
mation assets. Therefore, the framework
focuses on technical, administrative, and
procedural measures that will protect
critical infrastructure andincrease resit
ience of ICT and ICT-enabled environ-
ments. Cybercrime relates to the penal
law that punishes crimes'* committed with
the use of computer systems or in some
cases, attacks by the criminals on the
system itself. It pertains to the crimes that
affect the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of data and computer systems.

17






The thrust of the cybersecurity frame-
work is to build the trust and confi-
dence on ICT and cyberspace. Cy-
bercrime on the other hand, has its
strategy anchored on crime prevention
and criminal justice to ensure that the
rule of law applies in ICT and cyber-
space. In other words, cybercrime
focuses on investigation and prosecu-
tion (reactive state) while cybersecurity
is on security and protection (proactive
state).

Figure 2 illustrates how the concept
was developed. The Framework is
composed of three layers where all
three key players are interrelated but
have distinct functions. Their sets of ac-
tivities are planned and programmed
according to their mandates. Howev-
er, these activities shall work in synergy
with its counterparts through a cooper-
ative, collaborative, and coordinated
environment.

The driver for the framework is the
strategy under NCSP. The apex of the
pyramid also illustrates the interrela-
tionship between all key players and its
corresponding roles to implement the
NCSP. Emphasis is given also on the
importance of collaborating with
public, private, and international
partners.

The next layer indicates that sharing of
intelligence such as data and informa-
tion is crucial to identifying potential
threats, simulating scenarios, studying
threats and incidences, or develop-
ing innovative measures through con-
tinuous monitoring and evaluation of
information shared by stakeholders in a
timely manner.

The middle layer shall establish an
environment for sharing situational
awareness. The concept of sharing

of information acts as an enabler for
integrated operational actions which
can be orchestrated simultaneously or
in parallel with one another is invalu-
able to the entire lifecycle of incident
response management.

The bottom layer is where responses to
incidences and events are recorded,
monitored, evaluated, and analyzed
which will provide input to improve-
ments on processes, policies, guide-
lines, or procedures. As stated earlier,
the country’s cybersecurity capabilities
are still at its infancy stage, therefore,
the core framework in the protection of
the Cll shall adopt the NIST Cybersecu-
rity Framework'? as a starting point with
the following core functions: Identify =
Protect — Detect — Respond —
Recover. The activities under these
functions can be conducted
concurrently and continuously.

In developing the policy to implement
the strategy using the framework, the
government through DICT shall adopt
the proactive approach instead of
being reactive. We have to think and
strategize a couple of steps ahead of
the cybercriminals. The government
must take necessary measures to be
adaptable to the future social changes
and potential risks through constant
and continuous analysis of information
and data that have been gathered.

20



THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES

Framing of the vision, its objectives and
creating the framework is guided with
the principles on the following:

The Rule of Law

Cyberspace is a vast place with many
new and emerging areas still relatively
unknown and unexplored. However,
the rule of law is as much applied to
the cyberspace as it is strongly and
strictly observed in the physical world
to ensure that there is order in our
society.

Autonomy and Self-Governance
Cyberspace thrives in autonomous
systems that are run, managed, and
operated by various owners. The
Government intends to continue
respecting the selfgovernance that
cyberspace has developed. The foun-
dation of cyber governance is the abi-
ity of every individual or group to be
self-reliant and responsible users of the
Internet. Every individual or group ob-
serves the established universal values
and norms such as freedom, democ-
racy, peace, and stability within cyber-
space, as it is used by diverse individu-
als or groups from all over the world.

Collaboration with Multi-Stakeholders
and International Cooperation
Collaborating with mult#stakeholders
and establishing international cooper-
ation enables a community of practice
where information is shared among
these key stakeholders. Layers of
defense can be built through the

cooperation of the citizens, the busi-
nesses and organization, the education
providers, governments, and the whole
society in general. Protection and pre-
vention from multi-dimension groups
will minimize and manage these cyber-
attacks to minimum adverse impact.

Balance between Free Flow of
Information and Privacy Rights of
Individuals

The rights of every individual to have
equal access to the Internet are
upheld at all times. However, balance
must be made between protecting the
privacy of the individual against
securing protection of information and
data of the users.

Risk Based Management Approach
The Risk Based Management
Approach is another guiding principle
of the strategy. One of its national
targets is the protection and security of
the Clls. This approach provides a com-
prehensive preparation in the formula-
tion of a Risk Treatment Plan that the
government and other relevant sectors
will eventually undertake as it evalu-
ates and thoroughly considers the type
of risk appetite of the stakeholders.

21



ROLES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

The roles and responsibilities of the
stakeholders and key players must be
defined so that the functions of each
stakeholder will be in synergy with the
activities of other stakeholders. The
strategy provides clarity in the relation-
ship and interrelationship among the
stakeholders.

The job of making sure that cyber-
space is safe and secure is a collec-
tive effort that is shared by each and
every one of us. The government is just
a single piece in the macrocosm of
cyberspace.

Individuals

Individuals have a large role to play
since it is the biggest population base
in the internet. In the same manner
that we put value of securing our per-
sonal assets in the physical world, the
same consciousness of practice must
be observed in cyberspace. The cyber
environment is vast and the capacity
of the government to patrol the cyber
community is limited. However, the
individuals who created the cyber
community may act as a force multipli-
er and provide a neighborhood watch
against malicious individuals prowling
the Internet.

Business and Organizations

The heads of industry organizations
are drivers of our economy. Institutions
such as banking systems composed of
our financial institutions, together with
the business sector, create one of the
pillars of our country’s economy.

Government

Table 1 provides a brief description of
the governments functions and man-
dates and the interrelationship of pro-
cesses as well as interdependencies of
the key players in keeping our informa-
tion systems, computer systems, and
network systems accessible, available,
and functioning at all times and free
from any interruptions or disruptions,
whether intended or unintended.

=

22









The government through DICT shall
provide the formulation of policies,
guidelines and strategic direction for
cybersecurity. The CICC, being a co-
ordinating center for CERTs and LEAs,
as well as international linkages, shall
promote cooperative, coordinated,
and collaborative environment for all
stakeholders. The NCERT is the
operating arm for implementing
programs, projects, and activities for
computer emergency responses.

Although Table 1 has already
described in general the roles and the
responsibilities of the major key
stakeholders, the governance and
management structure shall be
fleshed out during stakeholders’
consultation to bring a cohesive and
coherent governance structure and
eliminate duplication or dysfunctions in
the course of implementing the Plan.

Roles and Responsibilities of Heads of
Agencies

It is also noteworthy to mention that
the heads of agencies are the first line
of defense in the protection of the Cll.
The following functions shall also be
mandatory to their existing functions
and the functions of their agencies:

i. Assess the risk and magnitude
of the harm that could result from
unauthorized access, use, disclosure,
disruption, modification, or destruction
of information or information systems
that support operations or assets under
their control;

ji. Determine the levels of infor-
mation security appropriate to
protect such information and
information systems;

ii. Implement policies and
procedures to cost-effectively reduce
risks fo an acceptable level; and

iv. Conduct periodic testing
and evaluation of information security
controls and techniques to ensure that
they are effectively implemented.

KEY AREAS FOR
CYBERSECURITY

There are several layers in security that
the strategy shall focus on and shall
prioritize for the development and
implementation of its policies, plans,
programs, and guidelines for secu-
rity and protection. To put emphasis,
cybersecurity relates to actions that
stakeholders must take to establish
and maintain security in cyberspace.
The other domains of security'* are
necessary in implementing the
protection of Cll.

Information Security

Information security talks about
confidentiality, integrity, availability,
authenticity, and nonrepudiation, of
information as an asset of the organi-
zation. We look at the strategy from
a multidimensional perspective. As
mentioned earlier, the digitization of
the world has made everything
interconnected and interdependent,
from man to machine through ICT
enabled-technology, internet,
mobile-based devices, or smart
devices(the concept of Internet of
Things or lol). This is achieved through
the application of policy, education,

25



training and awareness, and
technology. The government aims to
institutionalize information security
across all government agencies down
to the smallest operating units of the
government. The NCSP shall provide
the guidelines and the minimum
compliance requirements to jumpstart
implementation of information security
in the government.

Application Security

Application security is a process per-
formed to apply control and mea-
surements to application systems to
manage deployment and use risks.
These controls and measurements are
applied to the application itself (e.g.
processes, components, software, and
results), to the data (e.g. configuration
data, user data, organization data),
and to all technology, processes and
stakeholders involved in the applica-
tion’s life cycle.

When we develop the applications,
security should be embedded and
stressed into every stage of the System
Life Cycle Development (SLDC).
Security assessment of applications is
conducted after it is developed and

these issues are fixed. There are
malicious actors whose only intention
is to break into the computer systems
and network systems to damage
them, whether for fun or for profit.
Conducting application testing on a
regular basis will mitigate and identify
system vulnerabilities. Currently,
vulnerability assessments for applica-
tions developed are not fully
implemented and institutionalized
across all government agencies,
especially those that operate critical
systems.

Network Security

Network security covers design,
implementation, and operation of
networks to achieve the purpose of
information security on networks within
the government and public network,
between these networks, and
between government and public
network and the users.

Intrusion detection methods and traffic
analysis are one of the most basic
security measures we can implement
to ensure the security of our systems.
Auditing and monitoring our networks
and perimeter systems require a thor-

26



Intrusion detection methods and traffic
analysis are one of the most basic
security measures we can implement
to ensure the security of our systems.
Auditing and monitoring our networks
and perimeter systems require a
thorough understanding of our
network architecture and how
attackers can exploit gaps in between
these network systems. Technological
advancement and the growing
number of available network

hacking tools have increased the
threats into our systems. As a way to
combat the growing problem,
inventory of devices that are
connected into our network is
recommended. The strategy includes
the inventory of the government and
public network.

Internet Security

The objective of Internet security is to
protect Internet-related services and
ICT systems and networks as an
extension of network security in
organizations including in the privacy
of homes. It also ensures the reliability
and availability of Internet services.

Everyone uses the Internet. The risks
that the Internet poses to data and
information that flows across cyber-
space are high. Various threats over
the Internet must be fully understood.
One of the wlnerable groups with high
exposure in the internet is small
business-owners, especially since the
use of the e-commerce platform has

gained momentum. Raising the
awareness will help reduce the risks
and vulnerabilities.

Cll Protection

Systems and networks that are
operated by critical infrastructure
providers (e.g. telecommunications,
water resource agencies, or power
generators and plants) must be
protected and secured.

The critical information infrastructure
also known as the critical infostructure
(Cll) plays a vital role in our economy.
Adopting the approach of Integrating
Information Technology with Opera-
tional Technology in protecting critical
infrastructure is essential to the objec-
tives. When Operational Technology'*
(consist of hardware and software
systems to monitor and control indus-
trial controls including building control
systems, air/land/sea transportation
control systems, etc.) is deployed
together with Information Technology'®
(refers to application of computers to
transmit, processes, and store data)
the security defense in depth becomes
robust. The purpose of converging
these two methods will ensure protec-
tion of both the front and back ends
from intrusion and potential attacks.

In 2001, the Government indicated
that the list!’ of “critical infrastructure
includes, without limitation, power
plants, power transmissions and
distribution facilities, oil and gas

27



depots, key public work structures, vital
communications installations, public
and private buildings, and other facili-
ties in the center of commerce and
industry.” The NCSP 2022 expanded this
list and adopted the Cll list from the
Cybersecurity Strategy of Singapore’.
The list includes, but not limited to,
government and emergency services,
business process outsourcing, health-
care, media, banking, financial, power,
water, telecommunications, transport
and logistics. This was also classified
according to Services, Utilities, and
Transport that cuts across all sectors.
Our Cll must have the resiliency to
operate against information security
risk, network security risk, Internet secu-
rity risk, and cybersecurity risk.

Furthermore, government's commit-
ment to protect itself and public Cll
starts with adopting clear policy
objectives at the highest level of
government. The strategy shall include
the steps to enhance the security level
components of information system and
networks that constitute Cll. Risk
assessment shall be conducted based
on the analysis of vulnerabilities and
threats to the Cll. A periodic review on
the national risk management process
will help implement the risk manage-
ment strategy at every level.

It is however emphasized, that the
owners of Clls will have the primary
responsibility to secure and protect
these systems. The government can
only do so much having very limited

resources such as manpower and
financial resources. But together with
other system and Cll owners, we will be

able to create multilayers of security
and defend our cyberspace and pro-
tect our Cll.

CLASSIFICATION
OF NATIONAL
SECURITY SYSTEM

The term national security system
means, “any information’? system
(including telecommunication system)
used or operated by any agency

or outsourced to a third party by an
agency”:

The function, operation or use of which:

i. Involves intelligence activities;

ii. Involves cryptologic activities
related to national security;

fi. Involves Command and control of
military forces;

iv. Involves equipment that is
integral part of a weapon or weapons
system; or

v. Critical to the direct fulfillment of
military or intelligence missions.

Protected at all times by procedures
established for information that have
been specifically authorized under
criteria in an Executive Order or an Act
of Congress to be kept classified in the
interest of national security or foreign
policy.

Exclusions from National Security
System Classification

There is also the need to have a
distinction between a National Security
System (NSS) and those that are not
covered by the parameters for
classifying the NSS. The systems that are
not included are systems that are used

28



for routine administrative and business
applications (including but not limited
to payroll, finance, logistics, and

personnel management applications).

RISK MANAGEMENT
APPROACH

The methodologies for Cll protec-

tion is through the Risk Management
Approach. The government shall
manage its risks in the protection of the
Cll by identifying, analyzing, and
evaluating risks. The management of
the risk must be integrated into the
overall governance, strategy, planning,
implementation, management,
reporting processes, policies, values
and culture”.

Guidelines for implementing the risk
management approach shall be
formulated by the government through

DICT. Under the guidelines, critical
systems and Cll owners shall formulate
their risk management policy based on
its mission critical objectives, business
processes and operational environ-
ment needs.

Risk Assessment

To implement the risk-based manage-
ment approach, the government must
conduct the three stages of risk
assessment: identification, analysis, and
evaluation. In the formulation of the
risk evaluation criteria, the primary and
mandatory consideration shall be on
the NSS and Cll. The risk management
policy that government agencies shall
develop appropriate to their agency's
mandate and mission, must be aligned
with NCSP vision and mission objec-
tives.

29



STRATEGIC
COLLABORATION

Establish National Level
Committee

National Cybersecurity

Inter-Agency Committee (NCIAC)

The National Cybersecurity Inter-
Agency Committee (NCIAC) was
created in 2015 though Executive
Order No. 189. This initiative of creating
a single coordinating NCIAC is geared
towards a more efficient and effective
strategic planning and implementation
of measures with an ultimate goal of
strengthening cybersecurity capabili-
ties against existing and future cyber
threats and all other challenges with
respect to cyberspace. The National
CIAC would serve as a centralized hub
to harmonize and integrate national
efforts relating to cybersecurity.

Cybercrime Investigation and
Coordination Center (CICC)

The Cybercrime Investigation and Co-
ordination Center was created through
the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012
(R.A. 10175) function as a coordinating
body. The CICC also facilitates cok
laboration, cooperation, support, and
participation from multistakeholders
and the international bodies for cyber-
security related activities.

Public Private Partnership

Public Private Partnership Forums

The government cannot take on the
challenges and threats from cyber-
space by itself. However, creating
environments such as forums for shar-
ing and exchanging information will
provide an avenue for a public-private
partnership. The first step to a partner-
ship is to have a good communication
relationship with its stakeholders.

International Collaboration

The strategy shall not only focus its
efforts on local and domestic colla-
boration with its partner and counter-
part agencies for cybersecurity related
matters, but shall also forge internatio-
nal collaboration.

As the government prepares the en-
vironment for coordination, partner-
ship, and collaboration across all levels
and sectors of the government and
society, the concept shall also encou-
rage the creation of a Community of
Practice. Thereby upholding one of its
guiding principles, collaboration with
multi-stakeholders shall also help build
the cornerstones of a resilient ICT-
enabled governance.

30



KEY
STRATEGICINITIATIVES

The implementation of the NCSP, as indicated previously, hinges
on the national priority targets and the underpinning principles
that will also guide the formulation and preparation of its

implementation plan. Thus, there are five strategic initiatives that
shall be orchestrated under the DICT.



KEY PROGRAM AREAS

BPO

HS ww

PROTECTION OF Cll

As our government works
towards digital governance, the
support infrastructures that power
our virtual environment must be
able to sustain operation before,
during, or after any cyber
incidences or attacks. To fully
understand the importance of
the critical information
infrastructure in the digitization of
our government, we look at how
this was described*': information
components supporting the
critical infrastructure, and/or;
information infrastructure
supporting essential components
of government business, and/or;
information infrastructure
essential to the national
economy.

For the purpose of this docu-
ment, we shall define critical
information infrastructure as,
“critical infostruture whose failure
or limited operation due to
natural or man-made disasters
would surely cause a tremendous
impact on the majority of
citizens.”

However in order to bring every-
one on the same page, this
document will adopt the ele-
ments of infostructure, whether
physical or virtual, cited under
the Cybercrime Prevention Act
of 2012” as follows: computer
systems, and/or networks, and/or
computer programs, computer
data and/or traffic data.

Furthermore, it is also emphasized
that such infostructure is so vital
that interference and/or
destruction of such systems and
assets will have debilitating
impact on national security,
economic security, national
public health, public safety and
order.

To determine and establish the
resiliency of our Clls, the
government will focus on two
major activities that will help
establish the baseline for our
cybersecurity capability and
capacity in the protection of our
critical infostructure: Compliance
and Assessment and 2) National
Drill Exercises.

The compliance and assessment
shall be composed of three
levels: 1) Protection Assessment
(inventory level), 2) Security
Assessment (readiness) and

3) Compliance to Cyber Risks to
Cll (voluntary).

Cybersecurity Assessment and
Compliance

i. Protection Assessment
Project (ICT Systems)

ii. Security Assessment
Project (Readiness)

iii. Certificate of
Compliance to Cyber Risks to
Cll(Voluntary Program)

The strategic initiative of
protecting the Cll under levels 1
and 2 shallbecome a standard
practice and will work as
complementary to the

32



preparation of the Information
Systems Strategic Plan (ISSP) of any
government agency. Since the
ISSP is the blueprint of the digital
environment of a government
agency, this is an appropriate
vehicle to ensure that compliance
and assessment are institutionat
ized during implementation and
becomes embedded into the
regular programming of a
government unit. Level 3 on the
other hand isa voluntary program
where government agencies may
be assessed by a third party
institution (Certifying Body or other
institutions that promote
compliance to standards). This
program, although still proposed
as a voluntary program, in turn will
institutionalize the goal of
implementing a resilient ICT
environment for the government.

However, agencies and organ?
zations classified as Cll shall have
mandatory compliance to Level 3
and government agencies and or-
ganizations with sytems that have
been classified under National
Security System shall be compliant
with the requirements relevant to
standards on Information Security
(ISO/IEC 27000).

Establish Program for National
Cyber Drills and Exercises

After establishing the baseline
results for assessment and
compliance, government units
shall participate in National Cyber
Drills and Exercises. This shall
become a mandatory compli-
ance for all government agencies
in order to sustain the develop-
ment of our cybersecurity towards

the desired maturity level of our
systems.

Figure 3 illustrates the cybersecurity
maturity modeF and the agility
state we desire to achieve the
Resilient Enterprise. We will not be
able to defend well if we de-not
know our strengths and weak-
nesses. Therefore, in conducting
a self-assessment, the level of the
agility and speed of response
during cyber-attacks must be
determined.

At Reactive and Manual state, a
doctrine and the primary concern
is to put out fires as opposed to
finding the cause of the fire and
preventing the fire from spreading.

At the Tools-Based state, tools and
technologies are used to assist
people in reacting faster.

At the Integrated Picture state, the
focus is on interoperability where
standards are based on data ex-
change for situational awareness.

At the Dynamic Defense state,
operation functions are on a pre-
dictive and agile level because
the events are reviewed and
analyzed to help the responders
and operators identify, detect,
mitigate, and recover from these
attacks.

At the Resilient Enterprise state, the
objective is predictive and mission-
focused to isolate and contain
damage, secure supply chains,
and protect key critical infrastruc-
ture to continue operation through
cyber-attacks.

Ce) 4) &) &®&

33



The cybersecurity maturity level of the
country is still mostly at a Reactive and
Manual state. The goal of NCSP is to
reach the state of developed
resiliency and the ability to sustain
operations during and after cyber-
attacks. The NCSP is the roadmap that
will enable the government to reach
the Resilient Enterprise state.

Establish National Database for
Monitoring and Reporting

Currently, the country has no single
authority that manages a national
database and monitors threat reports,
including intrusion attempts and other
computer incidences. The data and
information remain in silo with different
agencies. To effectively identify and
protect our Cll against potential threat
attacks, complete information source

and availability of data must be
accessible at all times to authorized
government agencies and person-
nel. The data and information that are
collected can be used for research
and development, policy updates and
formulation, threat analysis, analysis of
emerging trends and patterns, etc.

Reporting™ of security breaches and
intrusion attempts including other com-
puter incidences or events shall be
mandatory to all government agen-
cies including agencies and offices
that have centralized collection and
repository of information. The data and
information that have been collected
shall become a valuable component
for developing and preparing innova-
tive measures in protecting and de-
fending our cyberspace.

34



PROTECTION OF
GOVERNMENT NETWORKS

The government in its national security
policy has recognized the growing
dependence of government, transpor-
tation, industries, and economy on all
components of cyberspace. The grow-
ing dependence increases the level
of exposure and vulnerability to cyber-
attacks. These are cyberattacks that
could lead to the paralysis of com-
munication infrastructure, international
financial systems, critical government
services and defense/military com-
mand and control systems.

Establishment of a National Computer
Emergency Response Program

A program for the national computer
emergency shall be established and
guidelines shall be formulated to aid
government agencies in the event of a
cyberattack or cyber incidents,
including prolonged cyberattacks. A
well-prepared emergency response
protocol should become part of the
operational environment of any
government agency down to the local
government unit. The program shall
include the development and
formulation of the Computer Emer-
gency Strategic Communications Plan.
This shall form part of the National Drill
Exercise which shall be done ona
periodic interval.

Establishment of CISO Programs in
Government Agencies

To implement the strategy efficiently, it
is recommended that CISO Programs
are established into Government

Agencies and the Local Government
Units. CISOs have an important role to
play in security governance. The
general responsibilities** of a CISO
includes but not limited to:

i. Integrating information secu-
rity measurement into the process for
planning, implementing,
evaluating, and documenting
remedial actions to address any
deficiencies in the information security
policies, procedures, and practices of
the agency;

ji. Obtaining the adequate
financial and human resources to
support information security
measurement program development
and implementation

iii. Leading the development of
any internal guidelines or
policy related to information
security measures;

iv. Using information security
measures in support of the agency's
CIO's annualreport to the agency
head on the effectiveness of the
agency's information security prog-
gram, including progress of remedial
actions;

v. Conducting information
security measures development and
implementation;

vi. Ensuring that a standard
process is used throughout the agen-
cy for information security measures
development, creation, analysis, and
reporting; and

vii. Using information security
measures for policy, resource
allocation, and budget decisions.

35



| lalalelalal lalallala |

raniiniininiinii@iniininiinlit ig a

The strategy requires that agencies
provide appropriate protection of their
resources through implementing a
comprehensive information program.
The program that each agency imple-
ments should be commensurate to the
sensitivity of the information being pro-
cessed, transmitted, and stored within
the information systems of the agency.

The CISO Program shall be jumpstarted
with a series of training and capacity
building activities to fully equip person-
nel who shall be given the assignment
to function as a CISO in an agency.

Establishment of the Computer
Emergency Response Structure

The Computer Emergency Response
Program shall be composed of the
National CERT, Government CERTs,
Sectoral CERTs, and Military CERTs. The
National CERT is the highest body for
cybersecurity related activities. All CERTs,
Government CERTS, Sectoral (or Private)
CERTs, Military CERTs, as well as orga-
nizational CERTs shall coordinate and
report incidences to the National CERT.

The Department of National Defense
(DND) will be in charge of establishing
and operating the Military CERT. Figure
4 illustrates the hierarchy of the Com-
puter Emergency Response structure in
the country.

However, the CERTs allover the country
shall also conduct reaHime coordination”
with CICC as provisioned in the law.

i. National Computer Emergen-
cy Response Team (NCERT)

ii. Government Computer Emer-
gency Response Team (GCERT)

iii. Sectoral Computer Emer-
gency Response Team (Sectoral and
Private CERT)

iv. Organizational Computer
Emergency Response Team (Organization
Level CERT)

v. Military Computer Emergency
Response Team (Military CERT)

Apart from establishing the hierarchy of
CERT in the country, governance
structure shall be clearly defined to
make the implementation of the NCSP
efficient and the monitoring of its
progress and milestones more effective
to ensure that the plan shall be on
target with its objectives until 2022.

Basic Computer Emergency Response
Program

The strategy will include projects that
will provide basic computer emergen-
cy response awareness to government
IT employees. IT personnel, although
they have technical understanding,
may not be fully aware of how to
respond to a computer security
incident that may compromise the
system.

36



Building the capability of the CERT of
government agencies will take time

to be developed and considerable
investment for training will have to be
planned accordingly. Therefore, the
first step is to build the awareness and
leveling of the understanding of how
computer emergency response works,
what to do in the event of the attack,
who to report to, and how to deal with
the impact of the cyber-attacks. This
will serve as preparatory stage while
the agencies are still in the organizing
stage (CERT building). The government
will provide training programs, such as
Training of Trainers, Basic Computer
Emergency Response, etc.

The program shall include regular
communication drill exercises to
synchronize the communication
practices and protocols of all CERTs
during cyber-attacks. All CERTs must
assign focal personnel to attend
meetings and coordination that shall
be established and scheduled at

regular intervals. The objective of the
government is to ensure that communi-
cations and coordination with CERTs all
over the country are firmly established
as we try to prepare and ensure that
we work together towards a resilient
ICT environment through Cll protection
of government and public networks.

Capacity Building and Capability
Development Program

Cultivating existing talents and develo-
ping new ones are long term develop-
ment plans and the investment shall be
substantial. The government needs to
acquire and strengthen its capabilities
to protect against any cyber threat.
This means we need to develop and
retain talented and qualified cyberse-
curity professionals. The government
shall engage and collaborate with

the academe and other educational
institutions to support the development
of cybersecurity specialists through
curriculum development. Much like the
need for skilled workforce to support

37



the Outsourcing Industry, the gap
between demand and supply for key
cybersecurity roles must be addressed
now. The lifeblood of any organization
is to have a skilled workforce. The life-
blood to secure our cyberspace is to
have skilledcybersecurity specialists.

Establish Pool of Information Security
and Cybersecurity Experts
The government shall maintain a list of
Information Security and Cybersecuri-
ty Experts. This can be accomplished
through several activities:

i. Establish Cyber Training
Facilities and Certification Programs

ii. Promote National Cyberse-
curity Research and Development
Program to attract and cultivate cyber
experts

ii. Establish Training Programs to
Develop Cybersecurity Specialist

iv. Promote Communities of
Practice (COP)

Establish Threat Intelligence and
Analysis Operations Center

One of the long term programs of the
strategy is to establish a Threat
Intelligence and Analysis Operations
Center. The concept is mainly to
provide a facility to house Research
and Development, Testing Laborato-
ries and Live Test of Threats and Threat
Scenario Simulators. The National
Database provides a repository of
information from all over the country
to gather data and intelligence that
are analyzed on a regular basis by
technically competent Analysts. Data
collection and intelligence gathering
are two basic methods for developing
and building up our defense in depth.
Building the competence of our threat
intelligence and analyst through
studying the various cyber incidences
and cyber-attacks will improve our
capability and capacity against future
cyberattacks. The government through

CICC and NCERT shall coordinate and
collaborate with other government
agencies with
existing facilities that function as threat
intelligence and analysis operations
center.
i. DND Cyber Defense Center
ii. NSC Threat Operations Center
iii. AFP Cyber Command
iv. NICA Cyber Intelligence and
Attribution Center

Protection of Electronic

Government Transactions

There are enabling laws such as the
Electronic Commerce Act of 2000°6
which provides the basis” for
employing cryptography as a means
to protect the integrity and authentic
ty of the documents that are
processed during government
transactions. The Plan shall provide
recommendations on policies that

will have impact on the digitization of
government transaction and formu-
late guidelines that will include the
protection of the electronic document
in transit, at rest, or during processing
using cryptography tools.

Update of Licensed Software

Software patches, and software
(including hardware devices such as
servers, network devices, etc.)
approaching its end of life cycle
support are also potential sources of
threats. The NCSP strategy requires that
all departments, bureaus, offices, and
other agencies of the national
government including constitutional
commissions, congress, the judiciary,
state universities and colleges, govern-
ment owned or controlled corporation,
and the local government units, shall
exercise mandatory review of all its
existing software licenses, machines
and devices to ensure that all neces-
sary components are up to date and
are still well within its life cycle period.

38



For protection of Military Networks,
there will be a Military Computer Emer-
gency Program. Under which is the
DND Defense Situation Monitoring Cen-
ter for Policy and the AFP Cyber Com-
mand for Operations. For intelligence,
a Threat Analysis Center will be estab-
lished under the NSC. The operating
arm will be the NICA Cyber Intelligence
and Attribution Center.

PROTECTION FOR SUPPLY
CHAIN

National Common Criteria Evaluation
and Certification Program
i. ICT Equipment Security
Evaluation and Certification Project
ii. Benchmarking Project

The challenges in cybersecurity are
mult#dimensional. Therefore, the need
to approach it from a multi-disciplinary
perspective is important. The objectives
of Supply Chain Protection are to pro-
mote secure and efficient movement
of goods and foster a supply chain sys-
tem that is prepared for and can with-
stand evolving threats and hazards,
and the ability to rapidly recover from
disruptions. In order to achieve this, the
strategy will work on enhancing the risk
management efforts that will include
addressing unknown risks to managing
the risk in the supply chain.

Apart from the strategy of employing
the risk management approach, the
government will also employ the com-
mon criteria to determine compliance
of the supplier, as well as establishing
the guidelines to conduct benchmark-
ing to ensure that the ICT equipment
are compliant with the estblished
standards of the government.

PROTECTIONOF
INDIVIDUALS

The protection of every citizen of the
country is primary to the functions of
the government. Protection is not only
confined to the physical environment
but also applies to the cyber environ-
ment. To protect the individuals,
cybersecurity awareness level must be
increased. The government will not be
able to combat and address every
single adverse event that occurs in a
cyber environment. However, when
we equip the citizens with the right
knowledge and their awareness is
increased on cybersecurity, half of the
battle is already done. Several projects
shall be rolled out as a parallel activity
for building up our technical capabili-
ties to protect and secure our cyber-
space while we raise the community
awareness for cybersecurity.

Accelerate Learning Skills and
Development

To implement the strategy for acceler-
ating learning and skills development,
there are four (4) objectives that are
formulated as bases for developing
appropriate programs.

a. Stimulate the development of
approaches and techniques that can
rapidly increase the supply of qualified
cybersecurity professionals.

i. Integration of subjects on
cybersecurity in the higher learning
curriculum;

ii. Integration of cybersecurity in
ladderized programs offered by Tech-
nical Education and Skills Develop-
ment Authority (TESDA);

39



ii. Promote advanced programs
and specialized courses that reduce
the time and cost for obtaining
knowledge, skills, and abilities for inde-
mand work roles;

ii.i Promote the use of
interactive learning programs such as
webinars

iv. Encourage the adoption of
apprenticeships and cooperative
education programs to provide an
immediate workforce that can earn a
salary while they learn the necessary
skills.

iv.i Promote apprenticeships
and cooperative programs to relevant
institution

b. Promote advanced programs and
specialized courses that reduce the time
and cost for obtaining knowledge, skills,
and abilities for in-demand work roles.

i. Promote the use of interactive
leaming programs such as webinars

c. Encourage the adoption of appren-
ticeships and cooperative education
programs to provide an immediate
workforce that can eam a salary while
they learn the necessary skills

i. Promote apprenticeships and
cooperative programs to relevant
institution

d. Promote efforts to identify gaps in
cybersecurity skills and raise awareness
of training that addresses identified work-
force needs.

Cybersecurity Outreach Project (QUAD
Media for multiplier effect)

Develop strategic relationships with
youth organizations, community- based
agencies, and relevant private
organizations in the domestic and
international scene.

a. #PRinT
To develop and activate cybersecurity
communication platforms thru Print,
Radio, Internet and Television:
i. Publication/Blogs/Newspaper
ii. Radio — Short ad/Jingle/public
service announcements (PSA)
iii. Build a strong web presence-
Website/Social Media Push/Mobile App
iv. Television Plugs - Celebrity
Ambassador

b. Cybersecurity Caravan

c. National Cybersecurity Awareness
Month

d. Government websites to have cyber-
security related content

National Cybersecurity Awareness Month
Under this strategy, there are five major
projects and activities that shall take
place until 2022. The goalis to bring the
awareness on cybersecurity to a wider
audience through these initial project
undertaking.

Equipping the Government
a. Capacity Building for Law
Enforcement Agencies
i. Judges, Prosecutors
b. Training of Trainers

Establishment and Creation of
Programs for Local and
International Cooperation

a. Establish cooperation and coordina-
tion among CERTs and law enforcement
(Cybersecurity and Cybercrime,
respectively), academia, and industries;
and

b. Formulate and prepare capacity

building programs for CERTs and law
enforcement

40



The NCSP shall also provide the
guidelines for establishing and creating
programs for local and intemational
cooperation. To create a robust coope-
ration environment, appropriate commu-
nications protocol and methods suitable
for communicating with the different
stakeholders such as the CERTs and the
Law Enforcement Agencies, the
academe and the industries must be
clearly formulated and established.
Furthermore, capacity building programs
shall be implemented back to back with
the cooperation program. The coope-
ration programs also involve policy issues
that can be translated and adopted to
the country level, together with the
appropriate mechanisms.

ACTIVE APPROACH

Identify

The government has to first establish the
baseline as well as understand the busi-
ness context of the organization's mission
critical objectives to ensure that the re-
sources that support the critical functions
are provided. There are several of said
activities such as Governance, Business
Environment, Asset Management, Risk
Management Strategy, and Risk Assess-
ment that shall be implemented.

Protect

After identifying and developing
organizational understanding to manage
cybersecurily risk to the systems, assets,
data, industrial controls, and technical
capabilities, activities such as Access
Control, Data Security, Information
Protection Processes and Procedures,
Maintenance, Protective Technology,
and Awareness and Training shall be
prioritized and included into the execu-
tion plan to ensure that the NCSP is
implemented.

Detect

The speed and agility of responding to
cyberattacks will largely depend on the
detection ability and timely discovery
of the cybersecurity event. Under this
phase, activities such as Anomalies and
Events, Security Continuous Monitoring,
and Detection Processes are implemen-
ted.

Respond

At this juncture, to respond is to develop
and implement the appropriate activi-
ties regarding a detected cybersecurity
event. Under this phase, activities such
as Response Planning, Communications,
Analysis, Mitigation and Improvements
are implemented.

Recover

The recovery stage is to develop and
implement the appropriate activities

to maintain plans for resilience and to
restore any capabilities or services that
were impaired due to a cybersecurity
event. Under this phase, the activities
that will cover the implementation plan
shall be Recovery Planning, Improve-
ments, and Communications.

PROACTIVE APPROACH

Defend

In developing our defense mechanism,
we have to look at how all kinds of
physical objects and people are inter-
connected by way of the ICTs and the
intemet. The integration of the physical
space and the cyberspace are further
magnified through the Internet of Things
(loT) phenomenon. Malicious actors in
cyberspace are constantly advancing
their attack methods. They keep up to
date with the latest technological
advancement and constantly explore
potential gaps within these new offerings

41



that they can exploit. In the implementa-
tion of our defense strategy and to build
our defense layers, we must engage
every citizen, businesses, organizations,
academe, and other govemments. This
will significantly reduce our exposure to
cyberattacks, cyber incidents, or cyber
threats and will be able to protect our
most valuable assets, while allowing the
ability to access, operate successfully,
and continuously use the internet.

The government's ability to disseminate
information must be in a manner and
speed appropriate to all types of
organization. Timely delivery of informa-
tion is crucial and important to launch
and engage all key stakeholders for a
synchronized action to defend our
cyberspace and must be simplified.

Deter

In building up the in-depth defense of
any government, organization, or enter-
prise, the first step is to adopt measures
that will deter these cyberattacks. There
are several actions that can be adopted
to serve as deterrence to an attack. One
of which is to raise the level of awareness
of cybersecurity. We also need to
identify these potential threats and
anticipate various scenarios to develop
countermeasures and use appropriate
measures and tools at our disposal. We
need to send the message to these
malicious actors that they cannot act
with impunity. We need to deny our ad-
versaries the opportunity to compromise
our systems and networks by trying to
understand their intent and capabilities.
The LEAs play a critical role in reducing
cybercrime. While we harden our Cll
against cyberattacks and reduce vulner-

abilities, the LEA will focus efforts through
any technical assistance and data
sharing from NCERTs in their relentless
pursuit of criminals and cybercriminals.

Develop

The gap between supply and demand
for cybersecurity specialists is something
that needs to be addressed by the
govemment. In order to address the issue
on the supply-demand gap for
cybersecurity specialists, an inventory of
IT professionals working within the
govemment shall be conducted and
specific intervention training programs
shall be prepared and developed.
Investing into the capacity and
capability program should be included
in the priority programs. While these short
and midterm actions are being
implemented, the long term direction
shall be on defining and developing the
cyber security skills needed across the
population. The effort is collaboration
among stakeholders from the public
sector, academe, and the industry. A
review on the Qualification Standards
and consultations with the Civil Service
Commission, the Department of Budget
and Finance and other govemment
agencies shall be conducted to prepare
and upgrade the plantilla organization
for cybersecurity professionals and
specialist who will be recruited for work
in the govemment by making the remu-
neration package attractive. A Talent
Retention Program shall also be planned
and prepared for implementation.

42









CONCLUSION

CyberSecurity is an evolving field with many international actors at play.
As such, it is inperative that a reliable mechanism is in place to address
constant updates in the virtual arena, underpinned on the premise of
collaboration with allied countries in the fronts of knowledge sharing,
coarchitecture of laboratories/training facilities, and mobility exchange.

In line with this, to keep abreast with the latest trends, a capacity building
program of international standard must be set in place in accordance to
the demands of digital forensics, network analytics, and defense concep-
tualization, among others. Included in the cooperation are detection/
mitigation regimes, frameworks for coordination of international originators
of attacks, and co-design of stakeholder engagement strategies.

Admittedly, the Philippines’ state of cybersecurity is still at its

infancy stage, even though there have been previous initiatives that have
already been undertaken through different agencies, including enabling
of the laws that have been promulgated to protect data and information.
The NCSP 2022 shall provide the roadmap to make a coherent and
cohesive strategy for cybersecurity and act as the enabler for
institutionalizing all the initiatives and strategies that have already been
started by different government agencies. Furthermore, it will address the
issue and challenges of a synchronized defense in the event of an attack
because the roles, functions, objectives and goals are clear and well
defined. We need to be ready for the disruptive nature that technology
brings. This is amplified further by the threats of cyberattacks and
disruption of systems (mechanical or human errors), whether accidental
or deliberate. We need to work as one in order to combat the challenges
that are posed by the dynamic and fluid changes that occur in cyber-
space as technology evolves and interconnectivity cuts across all levels of
government and society.



GLOSSARY

Access refers to the instruction, communication with, storing data in, retrieving data
from, or otherwise making use of any resources of a computer system or communication
network.

Communication refers to the transmission of information through information and com-
munication technology (ICT) media, including voice, video and other forms of data.

Computer refers to an electronic, magnetic, optical, electrochemical, or other data pro-
cessing or communications device, or grouping of such devices, capable of performing
logical, arithmetic, routing, or storage functions and which includes any storage facility
or equipment or communications facility or equipment directly related to or operating in
conjunction with such device. It covers any type of computer device including devices
with data processing capabilities like mobile phones, smart phones, computer networks
and other devices connected to the internet.

Computer data refers to any representation of facts, information, or concepts in a form
suitable for processing in a computer system. including a program suitable to cause
a computer system to perform a function, and includes electronic documents and/or
electronic data messages whether stored in local computer systems or online.

Computer program refers to a set of instructions executed by the computer to achieve
intended results.

Critical infrastructure refers to the computer systems, and/or networks, whether physical
or virtual, and/or the computer programs, computer data and/or traffic data so vital to
this country that the incapacity or destruction of or interference with such system and
assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national or economic security, na-
tional public health and safety, or any combination of those matters.

Cyber refers to a computer or a computer network, the electronic medium in which
online communication takes place.

Cyber espionage refers to the use of computer networks to gain illicit access to confi-
dential information, typically that by a government or other organization.

Cybercrime is defined as a crime in which a computer is the object of the crime (hack-
ing, phishing, soamming) or is used as a tool to commit an offense (child pornography,
hate crimes).

Cybersecurity refers to the collection of tools, policies, risk management approaches,

actions, training, best practices, assurance, and technologies that can be used to pro-
tect the cyber environment and organization and user's assets.

46



Cyberspace used to describe virtual world of computers.

Database refers to a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or in-
structions which are being prepared, processed or stored, or have been prepared, pro-
cessed or stored in a formalized manner, and which are intented for use in a computer
system.

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) is an attack in which multiple compromised com-
puter systems attack a target, such as a server, website, or other network resource, and
cause a denial of service for users of the targeted resource. The flood of incoming mes-
sages, connection requests, or malformed packets to the target system forces it to slow
down or even crash and shut down, thereby denying service to legitimate users or sys-
tems.

Internet of things (loT) a global infrastructure for the information society,
enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on
existing and evolving interoperable information and communication technologies.

Law Enforcement Authorities refers to the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) and the
Philippine National Police (PNP) under section 10 of RA 10175.

Malware short for "malicious software,” refers to software programs designed to damage
or do other unwanted actions on a computer system.

National Cybersecurity Plan refers to a comprehensive plan of actions designed to im-
prove the security and enhance cyber resilience of infrastructures and services. It is a
top-down approach to cybersecurity that contains broad policy statements and estab-
lishes a set of national objectives and priorities that should be achieved within a specific
timeframe.

National Security System (NSS) means any information system (including telecommuni-
cation system) used or operated by any organization or outsourced to a third party.

Phishing is a form of identity theft in which a scammer uses an authentic-looking email
from a legitimate business to trick recipients into giving out sensitive personal information,
such as a credit card, bank account, Social Security numbers, or other sensitive personal
information. The spoofed e-mail message urges the recipient to click on a link to update
their personal profile or carry out some transaction. The link then takes the victim to a
fake website where any personal or financial information entered is routed directly to the
scammer.

Preservation refers to the keeping of data that already exists in a stored form, protected
from anything that would cause its current quality or condition to change or deteriorate.
It is the activity that keeps that stored data secure and safe.

Traffic Data or Non-Content Data refers to any computer data other than the content of

the communication, including but not limited to the communication’'s origin, destination,
route, time, date, size, duration, or type of underlying service.

47



DICT OFFICIALS

RODOLFO A. SALALIMA
SECRETARY

tion and Communications Technology (DICT). He is a man with extensive expert

ence in IT both in the Philippines and on the international front. His over 40 years of
legal experience in the field of broadcast and telecommunications industry led him to
hold various executive positions in the telecommunications sector, both local and inter-
national, such as Telecommunications and Broadcast Attorneys of the Philippines Inc.,
the Philippine Electronics, and Telecommunications Federations in 1992 to 1996. He also
served as Vice Chairman of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Council
Working Group that worked on the Amendment of the ITU Constitution and Convention
at Geneva, Switzerland.

S ecretary Rodolfo Salalima is currently the Secretary of the Department of Informa-

Sec. Salalima was appointed by President Rodrigo Duterte as the first Secretary for the
newly established Department of ICT in 2016 where he committed to leave a lasting

legacy of enabling a one digitized government and empowering the Filipinos through
ICT.

ELISEO M. RIO, JR.
UNDERSECRETARY FOR SPECIALCONCERNS

DICT last September 13, 2016. He is an Electronic and Communications Engineer

who left an indelible mark in the field as the fourth placer in the first Philippine ECE
Licensure in 1971 and the “Most Outstanding Professional in the Field of Electronics and
Communication for the Year 2002.”

| sec. Eliseo M. Rio, Jr. was appointed as Undersecretary for Special Concerns of the

He served the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) where he held various positions and
retired as a Brigadier General. He was also a former Commissioner at the National Tele-
communications Commission (NTC) where one of his significant accomplishments was
surfacing the way to the proliferation of Call Centers and BPOs by enacting NTC MC 08-
07-2002 or the Rules and Regulations Authorizing Entities Other than Public Telecommu-
nications Entities to Install and Operate Public Calling Stations/Offices and Telecenters in
2002.

48



MONCHITO B. IBRAHIM
UNDERSECRETARY FOR
OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT

Management last March 2017. His extensive IT career which started in 1975 has
seen him working for multinational companies like Fujitsu, WeServ, Siemens-Nixdorf,
Comparex Germany, and Unisys Australia in various executive positions.

| ndersecretary Mon Ibrahim was appointed as Undersecretary for Operation and

He served as a member of the Executive Committee of the Southeast Asia Regional
Computer Confederation from 2004 to 2005, the Board of Advisers of the De La Salle
University College of Computer Studies, and the University of the Philippines Information
Technology Development Center (UPITDC). Currently, he is a Trustee and President of
the University of the Philippines System Information Technology Foundation (UPSITF) and
serving his 9th term as member of the Technical Panel for Information Technology Edu-
cation (TPITE) of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED).

He finished his B. S. Major in Chemistry at the Far Eastern University and attended At-
eneo de Manila University Graduate School of Business for his post graduate studies. He
also completed a Public Sector Executive Program on Innovative Government at the
Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy of the National University of Singapore.

DENIS F. VILLORENTE
UNDERSECRETARY FORINNOVATIONS
AND DEVELOPMENT

Executive Director for e-government at the Information and Communications

Technology Office (ICTO) where he conceptualized the Integrated Government
Philippines (iGov) Project, a comprehensive program that aims to connect government
agencies through shared infrastructure and ICT services. He was also Director of the
Advanced Science and Technology Institute, an agency under the Department of Sci-
ence and Technology, where he was instrumental in the establishment of the Philippine
Open Internet Exchange (PHOpen\kx).

P rior to his stint as Undersecretary for the DICT, Usec. Villorente served as Deputy

Usec. Villorente is a graduate of the University of the Philippines’ College of Engineering.
49



ALLAN SALIMCABANLONG
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FORCYBERSECURITY
ANDENABLING TECHNOLOGIES

concurrent Executive Director for Cybercrime Investigation and Coordination

Center Allan Salim Cabanlong is an ASEAN Engineer, a Professional Electronics
Engineer, and a graduate of Masters of Science in Global Information and Telecommu-
nications Studies at the Waseda University in Tokyo, Japan. He was instrumental in the
passage of the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012 and his expertise in the field of ICT
also helped him author books published internationally namely: “Law, Policy and Tech-
nology: Cyber Terrorism, Information Warfare and Internet Immobilization” published in
2012; and “Cyber Warfare: A Review of Theories, Law, Policies, Actual Incidents - and
the Dilemma of Anonymity in European Journal of Law and Technology” in 2010.

A ssistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Enabling Technologies for the DICT and

Asec. Cabanlong is a recipient of various local and international awards and has
served the Philippine National Police as Chief of Web Services and Cybersecurity
Division and Chief of the Information Technology Office prior to his appointment as
Assistant Secretarin the DICT.

He is also a recognized global expert in the field of cybersecurity and the leading figure
in the crafting of the Philippine National Cybersecurity Plan 202

ALAN ABONATES SILOR
ASSISTANT SECRETARY

extensive work with ICT-related NGOs and has served in leading business organi-

zations in various capacities. He is a member and former President of the Butuan
City Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Vice President for Business and Government
Affairs of the Filipino-Chinese Chamber of Commerce of Agusan, and a member of
the Institute of Electronics Engineers of the Philippines. Asec. Silor has also worked as
a station manager for two local stations in Butuan, was a President of the Caraga ICT
Council, and was part of the Audit and Standards Authority of the Kapisanan ng mga
Brodkaster ng Pilipinas.

A ssistant Secretary Silor is a proud son of Butuan City in Mindanao. He has done

Assistant Secretary Alan Silor’s current focus is the DICT project monitoring and

implementation in the various regions of the country. Pr



CARLOS MAYORICOE. CALIWARA

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGAL AFFAIRS AND
COMMUNICATIONS AND CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE
SECRETARY

of the DICT and also functions as the Chief of Staff to the Secretary of ICT. Asec.

Caliwara has been with the ICT industry since the early 1990s. He served as legal
counsel for various local and international companies, dealing with ICT-related issues
in contract management, human resources, intellectual property management, and
information security management. Atty. Caliwara is a staunch advocate of the protec-
tion of Filipino intellectual property works and digital piracy. He started working as a
consultant to ICTO's Free WiFi in Public Places Project where he closely worked with the
project team on legal and technical matters.

A ssistant Secretary Caliwara supervises the legal affairs and communications unit

Asec. Caliwara graduated from the Far Eastern University with a degree in A.B. Political
Science and secured Law degree from the San Beda College of Law. He also has a
Diploma in Industrial Relations from the University of the Philippines.

JOHN HENRY D. NAGA
ASSISTANT SECRETARY

agement, and the development and implementation of the merit and selection

plan. Atty. Naga's major accomplishment in the field of ICT is his pioneering work
in the conversion of all GMA TV Stations from analog TV to Digital Terrestial Television
Broadcast.

A ssistant Secretary Naga currently handles DICT’s legislative liaison, general man-

Atty. Naga is a graduate of the San Beda College of Law, and has worked as a lawyer
in the fields of tekecommunications, broadcast media, government and corporate con-
tracts, corporate legal management, and labor relations.

51






