REPUBLIC
OF GHANA

www.csa.gov.gh

NATIONAL
CYBERSECURITY
POLICY 8: STRATEGY

A Secure and Resilient Digital Ghana







contents

ESO

Foreword .

Preface .

Statement .

Introduction .

1.0 Background é: Situational Analysis
1.1 Cybercrime € Cybersecurity Defined
1.2 Global Perspective

1.3 Ghana's Cybersecurity Landscape

1.4 Ghana's Cyberspace Threat Actors

1.5 Opportunities .

2.0 Vision .

3.0 Mission .

4.0 Institutional Framework

4.1 National Cybersecurity Governance
4.2 Cyber Security Authority (CSA)

4.3 Joint Cybersecurity Committee (JCC)

Part One - National Cybersecurity Policy
5.0 Policy Statements

5.0.1 Policy Statement | — Legal Measures

5.0.2 Policy Statement Il — Technical Measures

5.0.3 Policy Statement IIl - Organisational Measures

5.0.4 Policy Statement IV — Capacity Building

60 Strategic Ipsratves

6.0.1 Build aR igital Ecosystel

(q_](_—————————

0 Nh un buy

12
16
20
21
21
22
23
23
23

26
27
217
217
28
28




6.0.1.1 Strategic Objectives

6.0.1.2 Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan
6.0.2 Secure Digital Infrastructure

6.0.2.1 Strategic Objectives

6.0.2.2 Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan
6.0.3 Develop National Capacity

6.0.3.1 Strategic Objectives

6.0.3.2 Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan
6.0.4 Deter Cybercrime

6.0.4.1 Strategic Objectives

6.0.4.2 Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan
6.0.5 Strengthen Cooperation

6.0.5.1 Strategic Objectives

6.0.5.2 Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan

7.0 Implementation .

8.0 Monitoring and Evaluation .
9.0 Funding for National Cybersecurity
10.0 Conclusion: Cybersecurity Beyond 2027

11.0 Acknowledgement .

12.0 Annex 1: Acronyms .

13.0 Annex 2: Glossary .




foreword

hana's socio-economic development is inherently underpinned by digitalisation. Our

Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy highlight the relevance of Ghana's digitalisation evolution to

Ghana's short, medium and long term economic and social development. To sustain the above
model of development, the need to scale up Ghana's cybersecurity readiness is paramount. Around the
world, security is one of the hallmarks of a strong economy and a prerequisite for the maintenance
of its sovereignty. For decades, Ghana has been considered one of Africa's safest nations due to its
prioritisation of democratic development, economic growth, peace and security. However, in recent
years and with the advent of ICT, security challenges have become more complex with changing trends
particularly during the COVID-19 era where there has been an increased dependency on technology. The
resulting cyber insecurity from the development of ICT has exposed our country to a number of cyber-
attacks that have been recorded over the past years.

The Government has therefore prioritised the need to secure the country's digital journey with the same
resolve that is used to secure our physical borders to keep the people of Ghana safe. In this regard, the
Government has introduced the Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038) to regulate cybersecurity activities
and promote cybersecurity development in the country. The Act which was passed by the 7th Parliament
is expected to provide a legal basis for our cybersecurity development and further improve our response
to the escalating phenomenon of cybercrime. It is our aim to ensure that all Children, the Public,
Businesses and Government are protected from cyber-related attacks. It is to this end, that the National
Cyber Security Centre was established in 2018 to oversee Ghana's cybersecurity development. One ofthe
tasks mandated to the Centre was to implement a National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy document
to act as a framework for a secure and resilient digital Ghana. Although we acknowledge that Ghana's
digital ecosystem cannot be insulated from attacks, however, our cyber resiliency will be defined by our
ability to detect, prevent, protect and recover from any form of cyber-attack on our critical information
infrastructure. It is in this regard that the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy essentially seeks
to provide a roadmap for providing a national policy direction and strategic implementation plan to
mitigating the effects of cyberattacks and deterring cybercriminals.

This is very important because Ghana's critical information infrastructure comprising systems that
run the financial, energy, telecommunication/ICT, defence, health, and other government sectors, are
at the heart of Ghana's network-centric based economy. These sectors are heavily dependent on ICT
Infrastructure and our sustained economic continuity is very much dependent on these critical systems.
Successful attacks against these systems could undermine our country's socio-economic survival,
compromise our national security, affect public health and safety, and undermine our sovereignty as
a nation in a very significant manner. However, if these sectors can thrive, they will act as a catalyst
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As a result, Government believes
that together with citizens as key stakeholders, this document will serve as a blueprint to contribute
significantly to the development of a multifaceted cybersecurity ecosystem, coupled with a robust and
digitally-driven economy.

Ghana's digitalisation initiatives are matched with sustained cybersecurity efforts to enable our country
tolachieve the full digital dividends associated pa and future developments in ICT.

AOS

H.E. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo
President of the Republic of Ghana

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy O)



preface

hana's economy has witnessed significant improvement in the use and reliance on digital

technology over the years which has accelerated with the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Although this has been animmeasurable advantageto development, the scale of digitalisation
and connectivity has resulted in a number of cybersecurity breaches that threaten the digital safety
of Children, the Public, Businesses and the Government at large. As Ghana continues to embark
and expand on digitalisation initiatives, cyber-attacks targeting our digital ecosystem are expected
to increase with resulting consequences that could undermine our modest developmental efforts.

To protect our critical information infrastructure and to safeguard our country's developing
digital ecosystem, the government, through the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation,
has introduced the National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy (NCPS) to complement the
implementation of the Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038). The Strategy provides an implementation
plan to the policy statements (Legal measures, Technical measures, Organisational measures,
Capacity Building, and Cooperation) of the Policy. The Strategy revolves around five intersecting
strategic imperatives which are Secure Digital Infrastructure, Deter Cybercrime, Develop National
Capacity, Build a Resilient Digital Economy and Strengthen Cybersecurity Cooperation.

The Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation working in collaboration with the Governing
Board ofthe Cyber Security Authority (CSA) and the Joint Cybersecurity Committee (JCC), introduced
this document to equip the Government with the tools needed to address issues of cybercrime. The
NCPS has been developed through constructive engagements with relevant stakeholders including
corporate entities, civil society organisation, academic and research institutions, international
partners and the general public at large.

This document does not only address ways the Government can combat cybercrime but also puts in
place measures to equip citizens with the requisite tools to ensure that they do not fall prey to cyber-
attacks. To combat cybercrime, a joint effort is required between the private and the public sector.
As co-owners of this document, l invite all of you to consider this National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy as our reference point towards a secure and resilient digital Ghana.

Mrs. Ursula Owusu-Ekuful (MP)
Minister for Communications and Digitalisation
Republic of Ghana

() National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



statement

ur world today has changed, with digitalisation presenting both opportunities and risks to

businesses, societies and nations. With the increasing dependency on networks and digital

systems for socio-economic developments, malicious actors are focusing on undermining
the Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of these infrastructures, thereby exposing the entire
digital ecosystem to harm.

Cyber threats are global in nature but their manifestations are localised. Consequently, Ghana is
not immune from such threats. The existential threats from cyber-attacks has led to the recognition
of the need for a national strategy to prevent potential cyber-attacks if possible and to prepare for
eventual attacks should they happen.

The adoption of this National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy (NCPS) itself represents a strategic
response to both existing and anticipated cyber threats which could undermine Ghana's gains in
digitalisation. The strategy provides unambiguous focus and direction to guide the development of
Ghana's cybersecurity for the next five years (2023 to 2027).

The Cyber Security Authority as the national agency responsible for cybersecurity matters in the
country is mindful of its mandate as the lead agency for the implementation of the NCPS. Whilst the
CSA recognises its lead responsibility with respect to the implementation of this national strategy,
the multi-dimensional nature of cybersecurity requires a multi-sectoral response.

It is however important to note that, the collective responsibility required to implement this
national strategy is recognised by the Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038). The establishment of the
Joint Cybersecurity Committee (JCC) (Section 13) and the creation of the Industry Forum (Section
81) are the two primary vehicles through which the collective responsibilities of all stakeholders can
be exercised for effective implementation of the NCPS. Our goal of preventing cyber-attacks against
Ghanas's digital infrastructure is the same; we only have differentiated responsibilities, reflecting in
our various mandates - as public sector agencies and as private sector actors.

The government of the day is only an enabler for cybersecurity development. The NCPS represents
the most important enabling intervention to guide the thinking and actions of all stakeholders as we
work to minimise the risks and to secure the benefits of a trusted digital environment for individuals,
businesses and the state.

The CSA is looking forward to working with all of you - our implementing partners, to achieve a
secure and resilient digital ecosystem for the benefit of everyone.

Dr. Álbert Antwi-Boasiako

Director-General, Cyber Security Authority
Republic of Ghana

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (5)



Introduction




igitalisation has been a significant

determinant of economic development

and developing economies continue
to experience its benefits. The benefits of
digitalisation are seen in increased foreign
direct investment, economic productivity and
job creation, among others. The digitalisation
drive of the Government is underpinned by an
ICT-enabled economy that manifests across
all its sectors consistent with pillar 9 (Industry,
Innovation and Infrastructure) of the United
Nations” Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Strong cybersecurity, and thereby
the protection of the confidentiality, integrity
and availability of ICT infrastructure and
data, is increasingly important to ensure that
individuals are able to exercise their human
rights, including the rights to freedom of
expression, and the right to privacy.

The internet has evolved from being solely an
information-exchange platform to becoming
the backbone of modern businesses, critical
services, infrastructure and social networks.
Although the reliance on digital infrastructure
is growing globally, technology remains
inherently vulnerable. The confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of ICT infrastructure
are challenged by rapidly evolvingcyberthreats
and their complexity. It has been established
that individuals and organised groups within
nations are increasingly resorting to cyber-
attacks not only to gain information but
to compromise infrastructure and disrupt
services.

As the economy grows and scales up
connectivity as part of the Government's
digitalisation agenda, the country will become
susceptible to attacks by cybercriminals. These

attacks can disrupt socio-economic activity
on a large scale. Thus, it is imperative for the
government to put in place an overreaching
policy and strategy that protects Children, the
Public, Businesses and Government.

The Policy which provides a direction to the
country's cybersecurity development directs
the national course in five pillars termed
policy statements which are Legal measures,
Technical measures, Organisational measures,
Capacity Building, and Cooperation. The
policy statements which is consistent with
ITU's Global Cybersecurity Agenda guideline
for cybersecurity development is aimed at
enhancing confidence, trust and security in the
ICT architecture of Ghana.

The Strategy serves as an implementation
tool to articulate the purpose of the Policy
statements which are to Build a Resilient
Digital Ecosystem, Secure Digital Infrastructure,
Develop National Capacity, Deter Cybercrime
and Strengthen Cooperation. These strategic
imperatives provide clear strategic objectives

and initiatives with their corresponding
descriptions,  timelines and relevant
stakeholders required to implement the

strategic imperatives for a secure and resilient
digital Ghana.

The National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy
is developed to direct the national course of
our cybersecurity development over a five-
year period from 2023 to 2027.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy O)



Background
¿ Situational
Analysis




1.0] Background é: Situational Analysis

1.1 Cybercrime €: Cybersecurity Defined

Over the years, there has been a digital revolution that has produced great innovation and
technological advancement across the globe. According to statistics carried out by Statista, the
digital population worldwide as of January 2021, had about 4.66 billion active internet users,
of which 4.2 billion were social media users. The increase in the accessibility, popularity and
convenience of digital communication has resulted in massive dependence on the internet and
computer systems. These developments have also created opportunities for malicious actors
to undermine the confidentiality, integrity and availability of computer systems and the data
contained therein. Strong cybersecurity, and thereby the protection of the confidentiality, integrity
and availability of ICT infrastructure and data, is increasingly important to ensure that individuals
are able to exercise their human rights, including the rights to freedom of expression, and the right
to privacy, especially online.

Cybercrimes include both cyber-dependent and cyber-enabled crimes. Cyber- dependent crimes
are those which can only be committed through the use of ICT devices, and where the devices
are both the tool for committing the crime, and the target of the crime. Cyber-enabled crimes
are traditional crimes that can be increased in scale or reach by the use of computers, computer
networks or other ICTs. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC) also describes
cybercrime as a criminal act, of which the target is computer information.

The technology for cybercrime has become widely available. The rate of internet penetration
especially in the developing world is increasing and the profile of computer and internet users
have become diverse. These developments have created opportunities for the perpetuation of
crime in the cyberspace. Cybercrime has evolved from its traditional forms into a complex criminal
reality involving ICT-dependent networks and systems. This has led to cyber-attacks including
sophisticated ones on the Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll) of nations. Cyber-attacks have
also raised data protection concerns leading to the development of data protection legislation
across the globe.

According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Cybersecurity is defined as the
collection of tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management
approaches, actions, trainings, best practices, assurance and technologies that can be used to
protect the cyber environment of organisations and user's assets. Cybersecurity is an integrated
domain comprising technology, people, and processes with the aim of achieving a secured cyber
environment.

According to a research commissioned by the Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation and
conducted bythe World Bankin collaboration withthe Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre (GCSCC)
of the University of Oxford, Ghana's cybersecurity development is currently at the Formative Stage.
The purpose of this Policy and Strategy is to provide a national direction and implementation plan
towards enhancing the security of our digital ecosystem. The Policy and Strategy on cybersecurity,
therefore, revolves around technology, processes and most importantly people, towards a secure
and resilient digital Ghana.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



1.2 Global Perspective

The use of information and communication technology has seen tremendous growth over the
years. The GSM Association (GSMA) reported in their 2019 annual report (The Mobile Economy)
that about half the world's population (3.8 billion) use mobile internet. It further estimates that
by the year 2025, mobile devices connected to the internet are expected to be 5 billion. Internet
of Things (loT) connections were stated to be 12 billion and estimated to increase to 24.6 billion
connections by 2025 in the same report.

( Internet of Things (10T) Q Mobile Internet Users

12bn 299,9» 24.6bn 3-8bn 5:0bn

Total Connections >.»
Penetration Rate

49% 61%

% of Population

Unique Mobile Subsriber

(65%) 2» Ág0% 5.2bn 5.8bn

% of Connections Gozs ) (025 )
22)>>>>>
4G 52% 46 56% Penetration Rate
70%
% of Population

Figure 1: Statistics on Global Internet usage

The world is experiencing a rapid emergence of technology tools and systems in recent times
underpinning global socio-economic development. For instance, there is an increased utilisation
of various digital platforms, especially duringthis era of COVID-19, to facilitate and coordinate the
activities of Governments, businesses and individuals globally. Cyber-attacks, therefore, have
become increasingly frequent, dynamic, complex and highly impactful due to this development.
The World Economic Forum (WEF) in its 2021 Global Risks Report indicated that dependence
on cloud computing jumped by a third in 2020. Network operators also registered as much as a
70% increase in the demand for internet and mobile data services. Video-conferencing also sky-

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



rocketed by 700% in 2020, according to the report. This further establishes the increased reliance
on technology for socio-economic development. This phenomenon is however accompanied by
a surge in cybercrime activities across the globe.

Cybersecurity has therefore dominated the global discourse on security because ofthe increasing
reliance of countries on ICT networks and systems. The global economy has become network-
centric and attacks targeting national critical infrastructure could affect it. The WannaCry
ransomware attack is an example of how a single cybersecurity incident could have a global
reach. The Bangladesh bank heist involving more than 80 million United States dollars is an
example of the vulnerability of our financial system to cyber-attacks. The cyber-attack which
shut down the Ukrainian power infrastructure is another example ofthe global cybersecurity risk
and the need for coordinated national, regional and international action to mitigate the growing
threat.

According to INTERPOL, cybercrime has become the topmost threat facing countries due to its
association with otherforms of crimes. Evidence has established the use of cyberspace for money
laundering, drug trafficking, human trafficking and terrorist-related activities among others. As
many countries, especially in the developing world, are adopting electronic voting systems, there
are real dangers that cyber-attacks could undermine the democratic developments of countries
that are seeking to consolidate their young democracies of which elections are key elements.
Increasingly, the nexus between cybercrime and national security challenges are manifesting on
a daily basis within Ghana's cybersecurity ecosystem. The cyber domain has therefore become
an active field not only for opportunistic cybercriminals and hackers but for organised crime
and state-sponsored actors. These developments require a paradigm shift, both in policy and
strategy, to face the threat. The INTERPOL indicated in its August 2020 report on Cybercrime:
COVID-19 Impact that the global health crisis occasioned a sharp increase in cybercriminal
activities related to COVID-19. According to information provided by the private sector partners of
INTERPOL, about 1million spam emails, 750 malware-related incidents and 50,000 malicious
URLs, all related to COVID-19 were detected between January and April 24, 2020.

In view of the above developments and as part of response strategies, countries have adopted
cybersecurity policies and strategies as well as relevant legislation to mitigate the threats. In
addition, many countries have set-up Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) and
Security Operations Centres (SOCs) to manage cybersecurity incidents. Harmonisation of
cybercrime and cybersecurity legislations has also been identified as one of the response
strategies to address the global threats. The Convention on Cybercrime, also known as the
Budapest Convention, has seen a surge of its membership to more than 65 countries as of March
2021 with Ghana becoming the 62nd state party to the Convention. The African Union adopted
the African Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection in 2014 to support
member states to improve their cybersecurity on the continent. The ECOWAS Commission has
adopted a number of regional directives and instruments including the Directive on Cybercrime
(Directive C/DIR. 1/08/11), Regional Cybersecurity and Cybercrime Strategy and the Regional
Policy on Critical Information Infrastructure to support member states to respond to existing
and emerging cybercrime and cybersecurity challenges.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy 0



1.3 Ghana's Cybersecurity Landscape

The vision of the Government of the Republic of Ghana is to develop its economy Beyond
Aid through digitalisation. This vision is underpinned by the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) which envisages a world where every country enjoys inclusive
and sustainable economic growth and decent work for all. Over the past couple of years, this
vision of the government has manifested in several digitalisation initiatives. These include the
implementation of the National Property Addressing System (NPAS), the National Identification
System (NIS), Mobile Money Financial Interoperability System, the Paperless Ports, the e-Justice
System, e-Procurement System and a number of e-government initiatives. The private sector, led
by the financial sector including the fintech industry and the tech community, is actively driving
the country's digitalisation agenda, which is being fuelled by the continuous growth in the use
of mobile devices, according to recent statistics from the National Communications Authority.

Further to these developments, Ghana's Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll) is inherently
dependent on ICT. Thus, the survival of the economy and its critical systems such as the financial
system, energy, telecommunications system, defence and government services are dependenton
the ability of the government to protect and secure these critical information assets. Successful
attacks against any of these Cll could significantly undermine the economic survival of the
country. Attacks targeting some of the critical systems have been recorded including successful
cyber-attacks against critical financial systems and databases.

According to recent statistics, Ghana has over 15.7 million people (50% of population) connected
to the internet and the digitalisation of all sectors of our economy coupled with electronic
payment systems have transformed the way we live and work. The impact of any attack on these
services would seriously impact businesses and Ghanaians in general. When critical databases
and information Infrastructure are hacked by unauthorised persons, the information can be used
to perpetuate an attack against an individual, a business or the state which puts the nation at
risk.

DIGITAL
STATISTICS
IN GHANA

El

= 15.7

3
Total Mobile Internet Users Active Social Media
Population Connections (Vs. Population Users (Vs. Population
(Urbanisation 57.7%) (Vs.Population 132.8%) 50.0%) 26.1%)

Figure 2: Statistics of Ghana's Internet Users

(2) National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



In recent times, there have been specific attacks targeting government websites and internal
networks by malicious internal and external actors. The growing use of social media for
impersonation in Ghana at large could undermine the trust in Ghana's cyberspace. The advent of
mobile money services in Ghanass financial space has also led to the rise of financially-motivated
scams with mobile money fraud accounting for the most common form of consumer fraud
according to an analysis conducted by the Cyber Security Authority (CSA). Access to the internet
and digital technologies by children and young people have also increased their risks of abuse and
exploitation on the internet with a number of reported cases, according to a report commissioned
by UNICEF. These examples of cybercrimes and cyber-attacks have also impacted on the privacy
of people in Ghana, raising serious data protection concerns. Consequently, a review of Ghana's
existing National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy has become imperative in order to enhance
the national response to these escalating cyber threats.

Acybersecurity maturity studycommissioned bytheMinistryofCommunicationsand Digitalisation
and conducted by the Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre (GCSCC) of the University of Oxford
in collaboration with the World Bank in 2018, described Ghana's cybersecurity maturity level at a
formative stage based on the Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model (CMM) for Nations adopted
for the study.

sanologies E Verso,
E ¿ MS
e E
e 4 4 $8 316 o,
E Y A 3 35 $3 o
o % 4 $55 55 $ ES
ESNICA yo
Ser ao
onto 90
persecaroy
Formal pa Pu
5 Frameworkto | al
E Combat Cybercrime | | IN O | Trustaná Comience z
ba LA ¿ on the Internet -]
y |
7 pe Und, ¿
al an , Po” Y
> / '
] - "me
> e J Ñ < $
e S gn % tejo
O, > - %
y 25% Ej A
E 4
% be, ¿sane

Cu ¿nina AN
Urity Education, Traininé

Figure 3: The State of Ghana's Cybersecurity as depicted by the CMM Assessment

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (3)



Findings from the assessment evidenced the implementation of a number of initiatives by the
Government. These include the adoption of a National Cybersecurity Institutional Framework
(NCIF), the appointment of a National Cybersecurity Advisor to advise the Ministry on the
implementation of national cybersecurity programmes, capacity building for the criminal justice
sector through the GLACY+ Project, the inauguration of the National Cyber Security Inter-Ministerial
Advisory Council (NCSIAC) and the National Cyber Security Technical Working Group (NCSTWG) in
2017, and the establishment of the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) in 2018 to coordinate
national cybersecurity activities, amongst other initiatives.

Ratification ofthe African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection (Malabo
Convention), the Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention) and the ECOWAS Regional
Cybersecurity and Cybercrime Strategy and the Regional Critical Infrastructure Protection Policy
has further enhanced Ghana's credibility in the fight against cybercrime through international
cooperation. The establishment of the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) in 2018 to coordinate
national cybersecurity programmes and the development of the Computer Emergency Response
Teams (CERTS) are other initiatives that have put Ghana on a modest path towards a secure and
resilient digital Ghana.

Ghana, in 2017 took a number of steps towards institutionalizing ¡ts cybersecurity development.
Critical among these steps is the establishment of a multi-sectoral institutional framework with
responsibility for national cybersecurity development.

lent
+
Minister for Communications
+
l

National Cyber Security
Inter-Ministerial Advisory Council
(NCSIAC)

NON-GOVERNMENTAL
REPRESENTATIVES

Business

Ministry of Communication
Ministry of National Security
Ministry of Interior
Ministry of Finance

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Justice/ Office of the Attorney General
Ministry of Defence

Civil Society

International Organisations

Academia

+
¡onal / Industry

Cyber Security
Advisor (CSA)

+ National Cyber Security

Technical Working Group (NCSTWG)

NON-GOVERNMENTAL
REPRESENTATIVES

National Information Technology Agency (NITA)
National Communications Authority (NCA)
National Identification Authority (NIA)

Data Protection Commission (DPC)

Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC)

National Security

Criminal Investigation Department (CID) Ghana Police Service
Economic 8: Organised Crime Office (EOCO)

Foreign Affairs
Bank of Ghana (B0G) Bu
Judicial Service

Ghana Army

Research Department

Bureau of National Intelligence (BNI)
Attorney General's Department

Civil Society

International Orga

Academia

National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC)

Figure 4: Ghana's Foundational Cybersecurity Institutional Framework

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



The institutional framework consisted of the National Cyber Security Inter-Ministerial Advisory
Council (NCSIAC), the National Cyber Security Technical Working Group (NCSTWG) and the
National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). The NCSIAC comprised sector Ministers from relevant
Ministries with a mandate to provide strategic and policy direction and guidance on matters
pertaining to Ghana's national cybersecurity. The NCSTWG comprised of representatives of
relevant government agencies and private sector representatives that are directly involved in
cybercrime and cybersecurity activities. The NCSTG was set-up as a technical and operational
coordinating body, under the direction of the National Cyber Security Centre, which was set-up
under the Ministry of Communications at the time to coordinate national cybersecurity activities
both in government and with the private sector.

The engagement of the above stakeholders of Ghana's cybersecurity architecture contributed
to the development of a number of strategic interventions in Ghana's formative cybersecurity
development. These include the launch of Ghana's National Cybersecurity Awareness Programme
dubbed “A Safer Digital Ghana, the establishment of Sectoral CERTs and SOCs, the launch of the
Cybercrime and Cybersecurity Incidents Points of Contact (PoC), accession to the Budapest
Convention, ratification of the Malabo Convention, capacity building especially for the criminal
justice sector, the development of the Cybersecurity Act, 2020, the establishment of a Digital
Forensics Lab for the Police CID and the revision of Ghana's National Cybersecurity Policy €:
Strategy, among other initiatives and programmes.

The formative development of Ghana's cybersecurity was also supported by a number of Ghana's
international partners, includingthe Council of Europe (through the GLACY+ Project), the European
Union, the World Bank, UNICEF, United States Government through the Security Governance
Initiative, ITU, the ECOWAS Commission, African Union Commission and the government of the
United Kingdom, among other bilateral partners.

This document is a revision of a previous Policy and Strategy document which was first developed
in 2011 and adopted in November 2016. The revision was necessitated by the increase of cyber
threats, the need for effective institutional and legal arrangements to deal with cybercrime at
the national level and the requirements to align Ghana's cybersecurity around international
treaties, conventions and best practices to facilitate effective cooperation both at the domestic
and international levels.

Despite these modest developments, Ghana's digital ecosystem ¡is inherently vulnerable and
exposed to cyber-attacks due to the following:

> Lack of a national cybersecurity risk management framework for the protection of
Critical Information Infrastructure (CI!) and Government Digitalisation Initiatives (GDIs)
> Weak standardisation and enforcement regime leading to high dependency on sub-

standard and in some cases pirated software which has penetrated the supply chain of
Ghana” digital ecosystem.

> High number of unemployed youth with ICT skills. Some of whom are actively engaged
in cybercrime.
> The influx of other nationals from the sub-region, some of whom are actively engaged in

cybercrime in Ghana.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (5)



> Weak response to cybercrime cases by the criminal justice sector resulting in the inability
to prosecute cybercrime perpetrators to serve as a deterrent to would-be perpetrators.

> nsufficient training and relevant skillset to address cybersecurity needs in various
institutions especially in the public sector

> Lack of public's trust in state agencies capability and willingness to fight cybercrime.

> General lack of cybersecurity awareness among the people in Ghana, compounded by
low digital literacy of a significant number of end-users.

> nadequate cybersecurity measures to protect small and medium enterprises.

> General lack of cybersecurity capacity across all levels of Ghana's digital ecosystem.

These vulnerabilities in addition to the emerging complexity and sophistication of cyber-attacks

expose the public, businesses and government to serious cyber risks.

1.4 Ghana's Cyberspace Threat Actors

Cybersecurity has dominated the global discourse on security because of the increasing reliance
of countries on ICT infrastructure. The global economy has become network-centric and attacks
targeting national critical systems could affect the global economy. Critical examples of how an
attack could cripple businesses and disrupt national systems include the WannaCry ransomware
attack affecting corporations and halting their operations, the Bangladesh bank heist in which
USD 80 Million was stolen and the shutdown of the Ukrainian power plant. In July 2019, a major
electricity supplierin Johannesburg, South Africa, suffered a ransomware attack leaving residents
without power for several hours. Similarly, Uganda's Mobile Money System experienced a cyber-
attack in October 2020 resulting in a shutdown of the system for several hours with an estimated
loss of about USD 3 Million. The effect of these attacks calls for coordinated national, regional and
international action to mitigate the growing threat.

_ ga

Insider Organised Other
Threat Crime Maliciouw
Actors Actors Actors

Natural/
State - a Environmental
sponsorel Induced Threat

Actors

Actors

mo

Figure 5: Global Cyberspace Threat Actors

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy




Globally, Africa is the second-largest continent in terms of geographic area with a population ofa
little over 1.2 billion people and internet penetration of 35.2%. Although governments across the
world recognise digital transformation as a power to accelerate the prosperity and wellbeing of
people, the digital world has also provided an opportunity for malicious actors to undermine or
thwart the gains from digitalisation.

A number of cyber-attacks and cybersecurity breaches have been reported globally. Malware,
crypto and denial of service attacks, hacking, fraud and insider threats are some of the common
cyber-attacks reported globally. The number of state-sponsored espionage and cyber-oriented
organised groups engaging in activities geared towards compromising public and private sector
networks has increased tremendously. Increasingly, the cyber dimension has been established to
be ever-presentin most serious and transnational crimes including terrorism, money laundering,
drug trafficking, human trafficking and other crimes with national security implications.

The growing use of digital services and the business it generates have become potential targets
for cybercriminals. As a nation, there is the need to address cybersecurity challenges to reap
the full dividends of the emerging digital economy. Generally, the cyber threat landscape with
its associated actors Ghana faces is no different from the international community. Ghana has
experienced different types of cybercrimes including cyber-dependent and cyber-enabled
crimes. These include website defacement, hacking into protected systems and databases,
ransomware attacks, identity theft, SIM box fraud, child online threats and general cyber-related
frauds, among others. These crimes have had not only financial or economic impacts on the
country but also social and political repercussions.

Hacktivists

Hacktivists (hackers and activists), who are politically, socially and ideologically motivated are on
the rise. They employ the same tools and tactics as typical hackers. Their tactics can range from
spreading messages through simple website defacement or exploitation or launch a Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attack to bring down entire networks. Unlike normal hackers, hacktivists
donotalways work alone. Hacktivists can also work as partofa coordinated group ororganisation.
These groups can range in size from a few friends to an entire decentralised network of hackers
around the world.

Insider Threat Actors

Insider threats with or without malicious intent remain a cyber risk to organisations especially in
the financial sector in Ghana. Malicious insiders, who are trusted employees of an organisation
and have access to critical systems and data, pose the greatest threat. They can cause financial
and reputational damage through the theft of sensitive data and intellectual property. They can
also pose a destructive cyber threat ifthey use their privileged knowledge, or access, to facilitate,
or launch, an attack to disrupt or degrade critical services on the network of their organisations,
or wipe data from the network. These malicious insider threats are mostly aggrieved employees
with personality traits of Narcissism (egoistic), Machiavellianism, and Psychopathy often termed
as the dark triad. Narcissists engage in such behaviours because they are only concerned about

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



themselves due to the sense of relevance than other employees, Machiavellians are manipulative
and pursue such acts for gains, while psychopaths do that for the thrills, regardless of the risks
to themselves or the organisation. Insiders or employees who accidentally cause cyber harm
through inadvertent clicking on a phishing email, plugging an infected USB into a computer, or
ignoring security procedures and downloading unsafe content from the Internet are often with
no malicious intent. Whilst they have no intention of deliberately harming the organisation,
their privileged access to systems and data means their actions can cause just as much damage
as a malicious insider. These individuals are often the victims of social engineering - they can
unwittingly provide access to the networks of their organisation or carry out instructions in good
faith that benefit cybercriminals.

State-Sponsored Actors

Ghana is conscious of the threat posed by state-affiliated or sponsored actors in the form
of a cyber-espionage attack. Attacks of this nature are carried out with a principal focus on
the government, defence, finance, energy, and telecommunications, among other critical
information infrastructures with a detrimental and devastating impact on national security and
a compromise on the sovereignty of the nation. State-affiliated or sponsored actors often have
particular objectives aligned with either the political, commercial, or military interests of their
country of origin.

Organised Crime Actors

The high reward low-risk nature of cybercrime has made digital platforms/ networks an attractive
environment for organised crime actors. Cybercrimes committed by organised crime actors
within the country include:

> Business Email Compromise, where cybercriminals spoof email addresses of employees
(usually executives) and send emails that look like they are from a trusted sender to trick victims
into revealing confidential information or sending money into specified accounts.

3 Impersonation of public officials, government appointees including Members of Parliament
(MP) on various social media platforms to facilitate the commission of online fraud (employment
scam, procurement fraud, etc.). These fraudulent profiles/pages, once taken down are created
again.

3 Extortion, usually a by-product of a romance scam. The perpetrators deceptively acquire
sexual images and videos of their victims and make countless monetary demands. When their
victims fail to comply, they threaten to share acquired nude pictures or videos on the internet.

3 Mobile Money (MoMo) fraud where cybercriminals among other modus operandi, social
engineer mobile money consumers to unwittingly send money to them, reveal their PIN or other
personal information about their mobile money accounts, which can be used to defraud the
customer.

3 Online Investment fraud involving cybercriminals who create social media handles and post
a fake advertisement of beneficiaries to lure victims. The investments promise unsustainable
returns or profits that outpace average market returns without corresponding risks.

As Ghana continues to experience a steady rise in the use of the internet among the populace,

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



terrorist groups and organisation have also employed the use of the internet to further intensify
their activities including recruitment through social media, financing, propaganda, training,
incitement to commit acts of terrorism, and the gathering and dissemination of information for
terrorist purposes.

Natural/Environmental Induced Threat Actors

Natural disasters including wildfire, landslides, flooding, earthquakes, pandemics and tidal
waves, etc. are caused by external natural phenomena and can be very difficult to predict or fully
prepare against. They have incredibly far-reaching consequences for the safety and wellbeing of
individuals and the country at large. They are force majeure with little or no control over their
occurrence. Cybercrime activities escalated during the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic
globally and Ghana wasnoexceptiontoitsimpact, duetothe over-reliance on digital platforms and
services to survive and provide essential services by Governments, individuals and businesses.
The adoption of technology for work, education and other social-related activities during such
natural occurrence, in the typical case of the pandemic, further created new opportunities for
cybercriminals to exploit vulnerabilities in systems and users.

Other Malicious Actors

Ghana recognises the emerging security risks emanating from the increased adoption of
advanced technology including cloud computing, cryptocurrency, artificial intelligence, the
Internet of Things (loT) and their corresponding implications on the user and national security,
should there be an attack. Ghana is mindful ofthe increased adoption of the internet by children
worldwide which has contributed to unprecedented growth in online child sexual exploitation
and abuse (OCSEA). Tactics and techniques employed by online predators include grooming,
stalking, live streaming, coercing and blackmailing children for sexual purposes and the sale of
OCSEA materials for profit.

Information Theft/ — e-----.. ,=-:e  Ransomware Attacks

E-espionage
Identity Theft/ o a rre + DoS/DDoS
Impersonation Y N

Cyber Fraud Pos / eenonoo + Man-in-the-Midde
CYBER-ATTACKS Attacks
8: TRENDS
Data Breaches —e--====-"A MA -------- +. Mobile Device
Security Threats

o ineerina a NÑ Advanced Persistent

o o? 7 Threats (APTS)

Malware Distribution  *e-----" '-----e E-Payments
(Mobile Money)

Figure 6: Ghana's Cyber-attacks Incidents and Trends.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



1.5 Opportunities
Notwithstanding the vulnerabilities identified, the following presents significant opportunities
for Ghana to develop and scale up its cybersecurity through the implementation ofthis strategy:

3 The current development around Ghanass digitalisation initiatives present a rare opportunity
to integrate cybersecurity programmes into the initiatives.

3  Known attacks on corporations around the world provide Ghana with insights in order to
adopt specific cybersecurity measures to prevent, detect and respond to such potential attacks.

3 Ghana enjoys certain goodwill within the international community. This has translated into a
number of cybersecurity collaborations with international partners. This strategy will build upon
the current engagements to strengthen such international cooperation towards building a truly
resilient digital ecosystem.

3 The modest achievement of Ghana on the cybersecurity front has also attracted interest
from many countries including those in the ECOWAS region. These developments necessitate
further action to replicate and leverage skills and initiatives to help collaborate, develop and lead
cybersecurity development efforts in the sub-region.

3 Most importantly, the current political climate in Ghana is significantly favourable and
receptive to cybersecurity development. Ghana's stakeholders in-country, sub-regional and
international partners are therefore called upon to come on board to support government efforts
towards a secure and resilient digital Ghana.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



A Secure and Resilient Digital Ghana

Our mission is to Build a Resilient Digital Ecosystem, Secure Digital Infrastructure, Develop National
Capacity, Deter Cybercrime, and Strengthen Cybersecurity Cooperation.



4.0 Institutional Framework

Effective governance is central to Ghana's cybersecurity development. As a result, Ghana
has implemented an effective cybersecurity governance institutional framework for efficient
coordination of cybersecurity issues across government and the private sector. Ghana's National
Cybersecurity Institutional Framework (NCIF) is underpinned by the following principles:

> Inter-ministerial involvement at strategic and policy levels;

> Inter-agency cooperation as well as private sector involvement at the operational level;

> Sustainability of the governance structure to effectively deliver on Ghana's cybersecurity
mandate;

> Partnerships and cooperation with non-governmental actors and Ghana's regional and

international partners.

a President

e Policy 8. Strategic Direction
3) Ministerial Representatives
Industry Representatives

Cybersecurity
Committee (JCC)

Director - General, CSA
a

Judicial Service

National Information Technology Agency (NITA)
o National Communications Authority (NCA)
Cyber Security Data Protection Commission (DPC)

Authority (CSA) Bank of Ghana (BoG)

Financial Intelligence Centre (Fl

National Intelligence Bureau (NIB)

Economic and Organised Crime Office (EOCO)
Criminal Investigations Department (CID)
National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS)
National Signals Bureau (NSB)

Defence Intelligence (DI)

Ghana Immigration Service (GIS)

External Intelligence

Ghana Armed Forces (GAF)

Office of the Attorney-General 2 Ministry of Justice
Ghana Domain Name Registry

(+) Non-Governmental
Representatives

> Private Sector 3 International
il > o o > Business Partners / Organisations
Figure 7: Ghana's Established Cybersecurity 23 Civil Society Organisations  = Professional / Industry
Institutional Framework 5 Academia Associations

(2) National Cybersecurity Policy € Stra:



4.1 National Cybersecurity Governance
The Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (1038) provides the legal framework for Ghana's national cybersecurity
governance. The involvement of key government stakeholders and private sector representatives
are expressly provided under Section 5 of the Cybersecurity Act, 2020. The governance structure
of Ghana's cybersecurity revolves around private-public partnership in the development of
cybersecurity strategies and programmes in accordance with Section 81 (Establishment of Industry
Forum) of the Act. The private-public partnership for the country's cybersecurity development is
emphasised by Article 26(3) of the Malabo Convention which mandates member states to develop
a private-public partnership as a model for engagement. Also, the ECOWAS Regional Cybersecurity
and Cybercrime Strategy encourage members to pursue active private sector participation in
national cybersecurity and cybercrime arrangements. As a member of the ITU, Ghana is required to
comply with the Union's recommendation in its Global Cybersecurity Index for members to ensure
private-public partnerships in cybersecurity development.

These developments stimulate the private sector involvement in the implementation of the
country's strategic cybersecurity initiatives. Key among the initiatives include capacity building
and awareness creation for SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises), coordination on incidence
response procedures with the National Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-Gh), regional
cybercrime/cybersecurity sensitisation programmes underpinned by the “A Safer Digital Ghana's
campaign, and research and development in cybersecurity, among others. Ghana's cybersecurity
international partners are adequately represented in the governance architecture.

4.2 Cyber Security Authority (CSA)

A Cyber Security Authority (CSA) has been established in accordance with Section 2 of Act 1038
to succeed the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), to regulate cybersecurity activities in
Ghana. The transition from the NCSC into the CSA ¡is necessitated by the regulatory functions of
the Authority expressed in Section 4 of the Act to regulate cybersecurity activities and promote the
development of cybersecurity in the country. The CSA oversees the development, implementation,
coordination and regulation of cybersecurity across government and non-governmental sectors.
The Authority is responsible for critical information infrastructure protection, incident response and
coordination, national cybersecurity awareness creation, cybersecurity policy €: standardisation,
cybersecurity guidance and advisory, international cooperation and Ghana's cybersecurity research
€ development towards self-reliance.

4.3 Joint Cybersecurity Committee (JCC)

The Joint Cybersecurity Committee (JCC), formerly the National Cyber Security Technical Working
Group (NCSTWG), has been established in accordance with Section 13 of Act 1038 mandated to
facilitate inter-agency cooperation on cybersecurity at the operational level. The Committee
composes of heads or senior representatives of relevant government agencies that are directly
and significantly involved in cybercrime and cybersecurity activities at the operational level.
Government representation and non-governmental stakeholders including representatives from
academia, business, and civil society organisations, constitute the committee.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (2)



Table 1: The JCC Representatives 8. Ghana's Cybersecurity Development in accordance with
Section 13(2) ofthe Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038).

Agency/Representative Role/Func:

Judicial Service Responsible for adjudication of cases involving
cybercrime.

National Information Technology Responsible for Government's IT infrastructure,

Agency (NITA) networks and services.

National Communications Responsible for the regulation of the

Authority (NCA) telecommunications sector.

Data Protection Commission (DPC) Responsible for data protection and privacy of
individuals.

Bank of Ghana (BoG) Responsible for regulating the financial services
sector.

Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) Responsible for financial intelligence and

countering cyber-based money laundering.

National Intelligence Bureau (NIB) A national security agency with a mandate on
national (internal) intelligence.

Economic and Organised Crime Office To monitor and investigate economic and

(EOCO) organised crime and on the authority of the
Attorney-General, prosecute these offences to
recover the proceeds of crime and provide for

related matters.
Criminal Investigations Department (CID) Responsible for cybercrime investigations
ofthe Ghana Police Service within the Ghana Police Service.
National Security Council Responsible for security coordination among
Secretariat (NSCS) law enforcement, security and intelligence
agencies.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Agency/Representative

National Signals Bureau (NSB)

Defence Intelligence

Role/Func:

The National Signals Bureau ¡is the National
Security Agency responsible for monitoring,
collecting,  analysing and  disseminating
information from cyberspace and electronic
media to counter threats to Ghana's security.

This is a semi-autonomous Intelligence Agency
dedicated to the provision of intelligence
relevant to the protection and defence of the
territorialintegrity of Ghana.

Ghana Immigration Service (GIS)

External Intelligence

Ghana Armed Forces

Responsible for the regulation and monitoring
of the entry, residence, employment and exit of
foreigners.

A Foreign Affairs agency with a mandate on
external intelligence.

Responsible for protecting Ghana's territorial
integrity from foreign  aggression and
maintaining internal security.

Public Prosecutions Division of the Office
of the Attorney-General and Ministry of
Justice

Responsible for public prosecutions including
cybercrime cases.

Ghana Doman Name Registry (GDNR)

Non-Governmental Representatives

Responsible for administering and managing
Ghana's domain name space.

Comprising representatives from the Private
Sector, Academia €: Research Institutions, Civil
Society, Professional and Industry Associations
and International Organisations.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (25)



National
Cybersecurity




Ghana's cybersecurity revolves around five policy statements consistent with the five strategic
pillars of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Global Cybersecurity Agenda and
international best practices. The policy provides a clear and specific national path and direction to
the country's cybersecurity development.

En Policy Statements

Technical
Measures

Capacity
2 o

Legal

Organisational

Measures Measures

Cooperation Ñ

Figure 8: The five (5) Policy Statements of Ghana's National Cybersecurity Policy

5.0.1 Policy Statement | — Legal Measures

Gaps in national legislations make cybercrime a low risk and lucrative venture. Government,
through the Office of the Attorney General and Ministry of Justice and relevant agencies, will
develop and conduct periodic reviews of Ghana's cybercrime and cybersecurity legislation. The
Government will ensure that Ghana's cybercrime and cybersecurity legislation are consistent and
interoperable with regional and international laws, treaties and conventions. The Government will
ensure that Ghana's legislation on cybercrime and cybersecurity are consistent with the human
rights and digital rights of citizens. The Government will progressively build capacity in the criminal
justice sector and other relevant national institutions for effective enforcement of cybercrime and
cybersecurity legislation.

5.0. 2 Policy Statement Il — Technical Measures

Vulnerabilities in hardware and software remain the main contributing factors for cyber-attacks
as malicious attacks are increasing in their complexity and sophistication. The Government will
implement appropriate technical measures to ensure the security of Ghana's digital ecosystem.
Among other technical measures, the Government will set up and operationalise Ghana's Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT) ecosystem, introduce National Cybersecurity Risk Management
Framework and standards especially for the Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll) in various
sectors, mechanisms for Cybersecurity Certification and Accreditations and Child Online Protection
(COP).

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (27)



5.0. 3 Policy Statement lll — Organisational Measures

Organisational and institutional arrangements are prerequisites for the effective development of
Ghana's national cybersecurity. The Government recognises the importance of a multi-stakeholder
approach towards addressing Ghana's cybercrime and cybersecurity challenges. The Government
will set up a national cybersecurity institutional framework that integrates governmental and
non-governmental cybersecurity stakeholders and ensures accountability among them. The
Government will develop its cybersecurity strategy and set-up a national agency responsible for
coordinating cybersecurity operations and activities both in government and in collaboration with
the private sector.

5.0. 4 Policy Statement IV — Capacity Building

To ensure the sustainable development of Ghana's cybersecurity ecosystem, investment in capacity
building efforts remains imperative. The Government will invest available resources to develop,
foster and maintain a national cybersecurity culture. The Government will embark on national
cybersecurity awareness programmes, support the development and adoption of appropriate
cybersecurity standards, invest in cybersecurity education across all levels in order to develop the
country's cybersecurity human resource base, prioritise the development of the local cybersecurity
industry and invest in research and development towards self-reliance.

5.0. 5 Policy Statement V — Cooperation

Cybercrime and cybersecurity challenges are multidimensional and cross- border. Consequently,
the Government will commit to partnerships and cooperation both within Ghana and through
regional and international cooperation arrangements. The Government will prioritise inter-
ministerial engagements, inter- agency cooperation and public-private partnerships in furtherance
of Ghana's cybersecurity cooperation agenda. The Government will actively participate and
contribute to international cooperation efforts towards addressing cybercrime and cybersecurity
challenges.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



part 2

National
Cybersecurity
Strategy



A National Cybersecurity Strategy has been developed to implement the policies outlined in
this document. The Strategy provides an implementation plan covering a number of strategic
imperatives expected to guide Ghana's cybersecurity development over the next five years (2023-
2027). The strategy focuses on mainstreaming a cybersecurity agenda across government and the
private sector, to help prioritise cybersecurity as an important focus area for the government. The
strategy establishes the mandate of key cybersecurity government and non-governmental actors
and directs the allocation of resources to the emerging and existing cybersecurity matters and
priorities.

The strategy is situated within other national developmental and strategic goals as represented
below:

Digital Ghana
Strategy

: National
National A
Security Strategy o

Figure 9: Ghana's National Cybersecurity Strategy is interlinked with
other national developmental goals

([J) Strategic Imperatives

The National Cybersecurity Strategy revolves around five strategic imperatives: Build a Resilient
Digital Ecosystem; Secure Digital Infrastructure; Develop National Capacity Deter Cybercrime; and
Strengthen Cybersecurity Cooperation.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



These are represented by the diagram below:

Build a resilient
digital ecosystem

Strengthen 2 :Qlo WIN . Secure Digital
Cooperation NATIONAL Infrastructure
CYBERSECURITY

STRATEGY

Deter

+ Develop National
Cybercrime

Capacity

Figure 10: The Five (5) Strategic Imperatives of Ghana's National Cybersecurity Strategy.

A number of initiatives under each of the imperatives have been identified for implementation
in the next five years (2023-2027). An implementation plan covering Short-Term (within 1 year),
Medium-Term (between 1 - 3 years) and Long-Term (between 3 - 5 years) is presented to guide the
realisation of the strategic initiatives. Each strategic initiative is underpinned by five objectives.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy En)



The concept of cyber resilience involves timely detection and recovery from cyber incidents when
they occur. Ghana will build a resilient digital ecosystem by creating a cybersecurity environment
that facilitates the sharing of timely and actionable cybersecurity information for proactive detection
of threats in order to ensure the availability of our digital ecosystem. Ghana will pursue and invest in

its ability to stay prepared for major cybersecurity incidents.

Strategic objectives underlining the strategic imperative are presented below:

Ghana will pursue, invest and test our ability to
prepare for major attacks in order to build confidence
in our entire cybersecurity ecosystem.

The general cybersecurity environment will be
pursued and scaled up across all sectors in order
to raise Ghanass resilience to both the common and
pervasive cyber-attacks.

Ghana will invest in cybersecurity research and
development including security of our internet
infrastructure across the public and private sector to
ensure continuous resilience of our digital ecosystem.

In order to provide assurance of our cyber resilience,
Ghana will implement the necessary national
cybersecurity contingency measures and subject
them to regular tests and exercises.

Effective coordination is key to achieve cyber
resilience. In this regard, Ghana will build an incident
response ecosystem that is inclusive, proactive,
interactive, trusted, and responsive to our national
incident response plan and needs. Measures taken
to achieve cyber resilience will comply with the
principles of legality and proportionality.




6.0.1.2 Strategic Initiatives 8 Implementation Plan

The following constitutes the Strategic Initiatives £ Implementation Plan that Ghana seeks to
implement towards achieving this Strategic Imperative. Timelines provided constitute short term
(1-2 years), medium-term (3-4 years) and long-term (4-5 years), and responsibilities are presented
for the various initiatives and actions.

Table 2: Build a Resilient Digital Ecosystem - Strategic Initiatives and Implementation Plan.

Strategic

Initiative

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Time
Frame

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

1.01 National
Cybersecurity
Contingency
Plan

1.02 CERT
Development

A cybersecurity  contingency plan
capable of facilitating our national
response to  cybersecurity  incidents
and cyber crisis management. The
plan will clearly define the roles and
responsibilities of different stakeholders
during  cybersecurity  emergencies
and crisis, based on a risk assessment
framework which will cover the process
of identifyingthreatsand vulnerabilities
and their potential impact, especially on
the Cll sectors. A review of contingency
plans shall be carried out, taking into
consideration lessons learnt from cyber
exercises.

Development of Computer Emergency
Response Team (CERT), comprising
a National CERT and Sectoral CERTs
responsible for incident response and
coordination across the public and the
private sector. This includes capacity
building and information sharing
to detect, investigate, analyse and
respond to  cyber-related incidents.
Security Operating Centres (SOCs) shall
be established to complement the
traditional functions of CERTs.

This initiative also involves cooperation
with international CERT bodies including
ITU, FIRST and AfricaCERT. Cybersecurity
exercises shall be conducted to test the
readiness and responsiveness of the
CERT capabilities. Ghana shall participate
in global and regional cybersecurity
incident response activities and
initiatives.

Short to +. CSA
Medium-term + JCC
+ Sectoral CERTS
+» Otherrelevant MDAs
+ Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

Short to + CSA
Medium-term + JCC
+ Sectoral CERTS
+» Otherrelevant MDAs
+ Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (3)



Strategic Description of Time Responsibility/
Initiative Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders
1.03 Establish and Establish and operationalise Points of Short-term CSA
Operationalise Contact to facilitate and coordinate JCC
Mechanisms for  cybercrime and cybersecurity incident Sectoral CERTs
Incident reporting. This will include both online Other relevant MDAs
Reporting and offline mechanisms for incident Non- Governmental
reporting. Effective coordination Stakeholders
and collaboration with the Police
CID, service providers and relevant
institutions especially with the JCC and
private sector shall be facilitated to
enhance reporting of cybercrime and
cybersecurity
incidents.
1.04  Establishment  Establishmentofan early warning system Short to CSA
of Cyber Risks to help provide situational awareness of Long-term JCC
Early Warning the country's cyber threats especially Sectoral CERTs
System Cli-based threats and also advise both Other relevant MDAs
the government and the private sector Non- Governmental
on cybersecurity matters. This will Stakeholders

involve an investment in technologies
such as analytics, automation, artificial
intelligence, and other state-of-the-
art security technologies to ensure
operational excellence for the timely
detection and response to cyber-
related incidents. This will promote the
continuous improvement of Ghana's
cybersecurity early

warning system.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



— a e AR
6.0.2 Secure Digital Infrastructure

The digital infrastructure of Ghana constitutes Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll), Government
Digitalisation Initiatives (GDI) and other digital networks and systems in the private sector. These,
especially the Cll, owned by both the government and the private sector, is of particular importance
because any successful cyber-attack on them would have a serious impact on the economic well-
being and national security ofthe country. The digital strength of Ghana resides in its ability to secure
these digital Infrastructure which form the backbone of the country's digitalisation developmental
goals. These imperatives outline how government and private sector participants intend to work
together to manage risks and achieve security and resilient outcomes and also ensure that Ghana's
digital infrastructure and assets are protected against cyber- attacks.

6.0.2.1 Strategic Objectives

Strategic objectives underlining the strategic imperative are presented below:

Ghana will identify and develop the necessary
security mechanisms towards securing Government
Digitalisation Initiatives (GDIs). This is to ensure

the security of these initiatives which are being
implemented through Ghana's Digital Strategy.

Ghana will identify and implement the necessary

security mechanisms for the protection of Critical
Information Infrastructure (Cl!) which forms the
backbone of our economic well-being.

Ghana will implement the necessary security
mechanisms to secure digital networks, systems and

: . Ghana will promote awareness on cyber risks
assets in the private sector.

targetting Cll as well as GDIs in order to secure
these critical digital systems.

Ghana will reinforce the security of its digital
infrastructure and and will invest in resources to
ensure the protection of this critical component ofits
digital ecosystem.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (55)



6.0.2.2 Strategic Initiatives 8 Implementation Plan

The following constitutes the Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan that Ghana seeks to
implement towards achieving this Strategic Imperative. Timelines and responsibilities are presented
for the various initiatives and actions.

Table 3: Secure Digital Infrastructure - Strategic Initiatives and Implementation Plan.

S/N Strategic Description of Time Responsibility/

Initiative Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders

2.01  Adoption of This involves the development  Shortto +. CSA
National and implementation of a National Medium-term + JCC
Cybersecurity Framework that will assist in the risk + Otherrelevant MDAs
Risk Management Management of all the Cll sectors and + Non- Governmental
Framework for Cll GDls. This initiative shall include the Stakeholders
2¿GDIs identification and risk assessment

of CIl sectors and GDIs as well as the
development of risk registers for Cil

and GDis.
2.02 Implementation The Cybersecurity Act will protect the Shortto +. CSA
ofthe Cil sectors, regulate cybersecurity Long-term . JCC
Cybersecurity activities and promote cybersecurity + Other relevant MDAs
Act, 2020 development. The implementation of + Non- Governmental
(Act 1038) the Act will also ensure that Ghana's Stakeholders

obligations under the international
treaties including the African Union
Convention on Cyber Security e
Personal Data Protection (Malabo
Convention), the Convention on
Cybercrime (Budapest Convention)
and relevant ECOWAS directives.

2.03  Establishmentof  Establish a National Public Key  Shortto +. CSA
aNational Public Infrastructure (PKI) to manage digital Medium-term + NITA
Key Infrastructure  certificatesin a public key cryptography +. JCC
(PKI). scheme. This would ensure secure + Other relevant MDAs
electronic transactions. This initiative + Non- Governmental
includes the development of policy Stakeholders

aspects of PKI and the adoption of
PKI- for e-government  initiatives.
Government and stakeholders will
promote PKlin e- commerce
development in the private sector.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



S/N

Strategic
Initiative

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Time
Frame

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

2.04  Establishment Establish Cybersecurity Assurance  Shortto + CSA
of Cybersecurity Programmes for Cll Sectors and GDls. Long-term . JCC
Assurance Baseline cybersecurity standards for + Other relevant MDAs
Programme for the Cll and GDIs and quality assurance + Non- Governmental
Cll Sectors and framework for Cll and GDis shall be Stakeholders
GDI Owners established. This initiative involves
security auditing and testing for the
Cll sectors and GD! owners including
regular Vulnerability Assessment and
Penetration
Testing (VAPT).
2.05  Establishment Establish a system to regularly identify Short to +. CSA
ofa Mechanism and disclose vulnerabilities in the Cll Medium-term + JCC
for Regular sectors and GDis. Mechanisms for + Other relevant MDAs
Vulnerability information sharing between Cll and + Non- Governmental
Disclosure GDI owners and the Government shall Stakeholders
be established including internal
and external communication
strategies with clear points of contact.
This initiative includes establishing the
framework for assessing the capability
of Cll and GDI owners to prevent,
detect, identify, respond and recover
from  cyber-attacks.  Cybersecurity
exercises to identify vulnerabilities
affecting Cll and GDIs shall be
conducted.
2.06  Establishment Establish a technology infrastructure  Shortto + CSA
ofa Central for device registration, SIM registration Medium-term + NCA
Equipment and verification as an important . JCC
Identification component of securing Ghana' digital + Otherrelevant MDAs

Register (CEIR)

ecosystem. This initiative shall provide
for the standardisation of SIM and
device registration and strengthen
the combat against Sim Box fraud and
cybercrime. The technology will have
a Central Equipment Identification
Management System (CEIMS) to ensure
the registration of devices in use on all
local networks.

+ Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (E)



To establish a digitally safe and secure Ghana, there are key capabilities required to establish and
manage effective cybersecurity. These capabilities can be established and developed concurrently
through the prioritisation of initiatives. Ghana's national cybersecurity capacity development starts
with awareness creation through the development of cybersecurity research and development
towards self-reliance and the exportation of cybersecurity products and services in the sub-region.
Ghana intends to achieve this strategic imperative through investment in cybersecurity in both the
public and the private sector.

Strategic objectives underlining the strategic imperatives are presented below:

Ghana's cybersecurity culture starts with awareness
raising. Awareness will be raised about the need
for cybersecurity and responsible behaviour in

cyberspace among Children, the Public, Businesses,
and Government.

Cybersecurity is of strategic importance to Ghana's
digital economy. A Cybersecurity Fund pursuant to
Section 29 of the Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038)
shall be established to ensure sustainable funding for
the development of Ghana's cybersecurity.

Ghana seeks to become a cybersecurity hub in
the ECOWAS sub-region. Consequently, an active
cybersecurity ecosystem will be created through
government's collaboration with industry, academia,
research institutions and international partners.

Ghana will pursue, develop and implement relevant
cybersecurity standards, frameworks and best
practices in order to promote a national culture of
cybersecurity across the entire digital ecosystem of
our country.

In order to ensure that Ghana achieves self-reliance
in cybersecurity, research and development will be
prioritised by actively investing in cybersecurity both
in the government and private sector.



6.0.3.2 Strategic Initiatives 8 Implementation Plan

The following constitutes the Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan that Ghana seeks to
implement towards achieving this Strategic Imperative. Timelines and responsibilities are presented
for the various initiatives and actions.

Table 4: Develop National Capacity - Strategic Initiatives and Implementation Plan.

Description of Time Responsibility/

Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders

3.01  Adoption of Adoption of standards and enforceable  Shortto +. CSA
Cybersecurity best practice guidance that outline Medium-term + JCC
Standards minimum expectations for all elements + National
8Accreditation of cybersecurity. This involves the Accreditation Board
Framework adoption of a nationally agreed (NAB)
baseline standard for cybersecurity + Ghana Standards
in the public and private sectors. Authority (GSA)

Standards for cybersecurity education, + Otherrelevant MDAs
a standard for  cybersecurity o WeCoaaaañal
professional certifications standards Sada

and  guidance for  cybersecurity

software and hardware development,

among others shall be introduced.

Integrating cybersecurity requirements

in public contracts and procurements

are anticipated under this initiative.

3.02 Child Online Development and implementation of  Shortto +. CSA
Protection (COP) a national COP framework based on  Long-term +. JCC
Framework international standards (ITU, UNICEF, + Ministry of Gender,
WeProtect, AU, etc.). Through a multi- Children and Social
stakeholder approach, COP guidelines Protection
for educators, parents, industry, + Ministry of
children and other stakeholders shall Educatión
be implemented under this initiative. + Internatiónal
This initiative involves capacity Partners (UNICEF
building and awareness creation on s
child online protection issues. Ame:
: + Otherrelevant MDAs
+ Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



S/N

3.03

3.04

Strategic
Initiative

Implement
Ghana's National
Cybersecurity
Organisational
Structure

National
Cybersecurity
Awareness
Programme

Description of
Strategic Initiative

A multi-stakeholder  organisational
structure that  underpins the
implementation of Ghana's National
Cybersecurity Strategy. This involves
the identification of stakeholders, their
roles and responsibilities including
operationalising the various sub-
working groups of the JCC. This
initiative will drive the rationalisation
and differentiation of the respective
roles of JCC members and other
stakeholders to prevent duplication
of efforts. Relevant Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) shall be
implemented to ensure efficiency in
cybersecurity operational coordination
at the national level. The initiative
will inform resource allocation for
the implementation of the multi-
stakeholder organisational structure
for cybersecurity and the development
of communication mechanisms

among stakeholders.

Develop a national programme to
build capacity and raise awareness on
cybercrime and cybersecurity issues
and promote a culture of cybersecurity
among Ghanaians. This initiative will
launch Ghanass national cybersecurity
awareness programme dubbed “A Safer
Digital Ghana. The capacity building
and awareness creation efforts will
focus on Children, the Public, Business
and Government. The Government
will engage the media, civil society
organisations, NGOs, international
partners, etc. on the implementation
of the awareness campaign. Relevant
monitoring and evaluation framework
shall be implemented to measure the
implementation of the Safer Digital
Ghana campaign.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

Time
Frame

Short to
Medium-term

Shortto
Long-term

.

.

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

CSA

JCC

Other relevant MDAs
Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

CSA

JCC

Ministry of
Education

Ministry of Gender,
Children and Social
Protection

Ministry of
Information

NCCE

Other relevant MDAs
International
Partners (UNICEF,
AU, ITU etc.)

Non- Governmental
Stakeholders




S/N

3.05

3.06

Strategic
Initiative

Development of
Cybersecurity
Education

Development
of Cyber
Defensive
Capabilities

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Implementing a systematic
cybersecurity education across all
levels of education in Ghana,
including  integrating  cybersecurity
education into the curricular of basic
and senior secondary education in
Ghana. The initiative also involves
integrating cybersecurity education
into all tertiary and continuing
education programmes and courses
in Ghana. Professional cybersecurity
education shall also be an important
element of this initiative to support the
development of Ghana's cybersecurity
workforce. Specialised cybersecurity
courses for defence, law enforcement
and national security agencies
shall be introduced through the
programmes of the National Cyber
Academy.

Development of national capabilities
in defensive cybersecurity towards self-
reliance. National Cyber Defense
Programmes involving law
enforcement, intelligence and national
security agencies shall be established.
Partnerships with  cybersecurity
research centres at the domestic
and international levels shall be
established for the development of
cyber defensive capabilities. This
initiative shall develop national cyber
capabilities to protect and defend
Ghanass interest in the cyberspace.

Time Responsibility/
Frame Stakeholders

Short to + CSA
Long-term . JCC
+ Ministry of
Education
+ Otherrelevant MDAs
+ National
Accreditation Board
(NAB)
+ Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

Medium to + CSA
Long-term + NSCS
. JCC

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



S/N

3.07

3.08

Strategic
Initiative

Implementation
of Data Protection
8. Digital Right
Initiatives

Establishment of
a Cybersecurity
Fund

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Implementation of national initiatives
to ensure enforcement of privacy rights
of people in Ghana, together with plans
to safeguard digital rights of citizens.
Awareness creation on data protection
principles, rights and obligations of
individuals and data controllers shall be
promoted at the national level. Digital
rights' campaigns to ensure freedom of
users in Ghana in the cyberspace shall
be developed through collaboration
with Civil Society Organisations.

An establishment of a dedicated
fund pursuant to Section 29 of the
Cybersecurity Act, 2020 (Act 1038) for
the promotion and development of
Ghana's  cybersecurity. Government
shall establish the fund to ensure
sustainable financial inflow to support
the implementation of  Ghana's
National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy. The Fund shall support
Ghana's Research and Development
activities in cybersecurity. The fund
shall also support the development
of the local cybersecurity industry
and will support Ghana's involvement
in the development of regional and
international cybersecurity initiatives.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

Time
Frame

Shortto
Long-term

Short-term

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

CSA

JCC

Data Protection
Commission
Freedom Online
Coalition

Other International
Partners

Civil Society
Organisations
Other relevant MDAs
Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

Parliament

Ministry of Finance
CSA

JCC

Non- Governmental
Stakeholders




S/N

3.09

Strategic
Initiative

Development
ofthe Local
Cybersecurity
Industry

Description of
Strategic Initiative

The Government will actively pursue
and develop the local cybersecurity
industry by  promoting relevant
investments and  public-private
partnerships as the development
of the local industry constitute an
important element of Ghana's goal for
cybersecurity resilience. This initiative
will promote the development of local
talents and skills in cybersecurity
among Ghanaians. Consistent with
national policy on local contents,
the Government will allocate at least
30% of government cybersecurity
projects and contracts to qualified
and accredited local cybersecurity
irms. An annual budget to fund
cybersecurity innovative products
through competitive bidding by loca
cybersecurity firms shall be encouraged
by the Government. This initiative
shall promote  Commercialisation
of  cybersecurity products and
solutions through collaboration
between government, local firms,
Universities and research centres.
Ghana will promote the exportation
of cybersecurity skills, services and
products in the sub-region through
this initiative.

Time
Frame

Shortto .
Long-term .

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

CSA

JCC

Private Sector
Other relevant MDAs
Non- Governmental
Stakeholders

3.10

Establishment of
a National Cyber
Academy

Establish a dedicated Cyber Academy
to support the development of Ghana's
workforce in  cybersecurity. This
initiative involves training and skills
development of public sector officials,
law enforcement and national security
agenciesin cybersecurity. The academy
will also support the development of
skills and competency in cybersecurity
in the non-traditional education sector.

Short to .
Medium-term +.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

CSA

JCC

Ministry of
Education

National
Accreditation Board
(NAB)

Other relevant MDAs
Non- Governmental
Stakeholders




S/N Strategic Description of Time Responsibility/

Initiative Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders

3.11  Adoption of Implementation of a national  Shortto +. CSA
National monitoring and evaluation framework  Long-term + JCC
Cybersecurity to measure the implementation + Other relevant MDAs
Monitoring of Ghana's National Cybersecurity + Non- Governmental
and Evaluation  Jevelopment at each stage of Stakeholders
(MEE) the development process. The
Framework Government will adopt appropriate
metrics and benchmarks for the MgE
framework and will deploy atechnology
infrastructure to implement the
framework.
3.12  Cybersecurity Develop a roadmap that identifies  Mediumto + CSA
Research and Ghana's cybersecurity R£D needs and Long-term . JCC
Development the necessary actions and timelines for + Other relevant MDAs
(RED) implementation. The document which + Non- Governmental
will guide Ghana's cybersecurity Stakeholders

RED development towards  self-
reliance shall be introduced. Through
cybersecurity Rg£D needs analysis,
Government will establish inter-agency
and inter-sector coordination on this
initiative. Government shall encourage
and promote partnerships with the
private sector, academia, research
institutions and international partners
by creating incentives for cybersecurity
innovation. A dedicated budget for
Ghana's cybersecurity R£D shall be
sourced from the Cybersecurity Fund.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Cybercrime is a threat to Ghana's vision of developing its economy through digitalisation as it has
both direct and indirect impacts on Ghana's developmental agenda. Cybercrimes range from cyber-
enabled and cyber-dependent crimes. Cybercrime actors include individuals, organised groups as
well as state-sponsored. Ghana's response to cybercrime is based on the concept of deterrence. This
is by adopting relevant proactive and reactive measures to ensure cybercrime becomes a high-risk
venture for perpetrators. The deterrence approach will also culminate in raising the security posture
of the digital infrastructure. Ghana will continue to foster global alliances and promote criminal justice
responseto cybercrimes through the application of both domestic and international laws and treaties.

Strategic objectives underlining the strategic imperative are presented below:

Ghana will pursue, adopt and implement relevant
policies, strategies and legislation to counter both
existing and emerging cybercrime trends whiles
upholding the rule of law in cyberspace.

Ghana will pursue the necessary deterrent actions to
minimise the impact of cybercrime on our domestic
and global economies.

Ghana will equip ¡ts law enforcement and criminal
justice authorities, to maintain relevant and
proportionate capabilities to enforce existing and
future cybercrime legislation, consistent with its
obligations under international, regional, and
national human right laws.

Ghana will pursue appropriate offensive and
defensive cyber capabilities as part of our medium to
long term cybercrime response capabilities to serves
as a deterrent to those who intend to undermine the
digital life of the citizens, business and government.

Ghana will continue to review its legislation to ensure

O they are relevant, effective and responds to all forms
of cybercrime.




6.0.4.2 Strategic Initiatives 8 Implementation Plan

The following constitutes the Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan that Ghana seeks to
implement towards achieving this Strategic Imperative. Timelines and responsibilities are presented
for the various initiatives and actions.

Table 5: Deter Cybercrime - Strategic Initiatives and Implementation Plan.

Time
Frame

S/N Strategic

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

Description of

Initiative Strategic Initiative

4.01  Establishmentof  Establish a National Digital Forensics  Shortto + CSA

National Digital Laboratory to support law enforcement Medium-term + JCC
Forensics agencies to carry out cybercrime and + NSCS
Laboratory cybersecurity investigations. A national + LawEnforcement and

lab for law enforcement agencies with
cyber forensics technology shall be
established. This initiative involves the
development of standard operating
procedures and relevant guidelines to
support cybercrime and cybersecurity
investigations as well as digital
forensics case management.

Security Agencies

Shortto +. CSA
Long-term +. JCC

4.02  Establish Regional
Cybercrime Units

Regional Centresto support cybercrime
response in the administrative regions

of Ghana shall be established. This
will include the establishment of
dedicated units with relevant cyber
forensic capabilities at each of the
administrative/law enforcement
agencies in the regions of Ghana. The
Units will have the expertise to receive
complaints, provide first response
and forensics response on cybercrime
cases. Such Units will however refer
complex  cybercrime cases and
incidents to the National Digital
Forensics Lab.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

Ghana Police/CID
NSCS

Other relevant
international
partners (INTERPOL,
Council of Europe,
etc.)




S/N Strategic

Initiative

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Time Responsibility/
Frame Stakeholders

4.03 Establish
Cybercrime
Prosecutions
Division at the
Office ofthe
Attorney-General

4.04 Establish
Specialised
Courts for
Cybercrime

Establish a cybercrime prosecutions
division at the Office of the Attorney-
General's Department to facilitate the
prosecution of cybercrime cases. This
will increase our national response
in addressing cybercrime and help
improve our institutional structures by
engaging the relevant institutions
in the fight against cybercrime and
provide for other related matters.
The division will have expertise with
knowledge in cyber lawto complement
their background in traditional law
or effective adjudication of cyber-
acilitated crimes.

Establish  specialised  courts for
prosecuting cybercrime cases. This
will project our national response and
commitment to addressing cybercrime
by building strong institutions
with a mandate on the matter. The
specialised courts will have Judges
and Officials with expertise in cyber
aw to appreciate cybercrime and
cybersecurity issues for effective
adjudication of cyber-facilitated crimes
and provide for other matters.

Short to + CSA
Long-term . JCC
+» Office ofthe
Attorney-General
and Ministry of
Justice

Short to + CSA
Long-term . JCC
+ Judicial Service
+ NSCS
+ Ghana Bar
Association

4.05 Review of
Evidence Act

Areview of Ghana's Evidence Act-1975
(NRCD 323) to provide a clear legal
framework for the admissibility of
digital evidence. This initiative involves
gap analysis on the effectiveness
of the current Evidence Act in
addressing cybercrime  prosecution
and  adjudications. This initiative
will ensure digital evidence is given
equal treatment as other traditional
forms of evidence in view of the
current digitalisation context. Office
of the Attorney-General and Ministry
of Justice Department working in
collaboration with relevant agencies
shall lead efforts on the review of the
Evidence Act.

Medium-term + CSA

. JCC

+» Office ofthe
Attorney-General
and Ministry of
Justice

+ NSCS

+ Law Reform
Commission

+ Ghana Police/CID

+ Ghana Bar
Association

+ Otherrelevant
international
partners

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



S/N

4.06

Strategic
Initiative

Training for
Criminal Justice
Sector

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Equip the criminal justice sector with
the right knowledge, skills and tools
to respond, investigate and prosecute
cybercriminals. Establishment
of institutional capacity building
programmes for judges, prosecutors,
police personnel and officials from
other security agencies.

Continuous — training for  Judges,
Prosecutors and Investigators through
the integration of cybercrime and
digital evidence courses into the
curriculum of criminal justice sector
training institutions. — Training on
cybercrime and digital evidence for
members of the Ghana Bar Association
shall also be implemented as part of
this initiative.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

Time
Frame

Short to
Long-term

.

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

CSA

JCC

Other relevant
international
partners (INTERPOL,
Council of Europe,
etc.)

Ghana Bar
Association
Judicial Training
Institute




Cybersecurity is not only a cross-cutting issue; it is also a transnational issue. In the past few years,
cybersecurity has dominated both economic and security debates at the international level. As a
result, Ghana will pursue a free, open, innovative and secure cyberspace as part ofits foreign policy.
Ghana will pursue relevant actions and strategies that seek to advance this policy direction. The
in-country cooperation on cybersecurity through the work of the Joint Cybersecurity Committee
(4CC) and other relevant engagements shall be strengthened. Ghana will also lead sub-regional
and regional efforts on cybersecurity especially at the ECOWAS and the African Union. The country
shall continue to actively engage in international treaties, partnerships and engagements with ¡ts
partners including the United Nations, the Council of Europe and the Commonwealth to solidify
international response against cybercrimes.

Strategic objectives underlining the strategic imperative are presented below:

Ghana will continue to pursue and strengthen its
domestic cooperation mechanisms in addressing
cybercrime challenges.

Issues of cybersecurity are cross-cutting and trans-
sectoral in nature. As a result, Ghana will adopt
an inclusive and multi-stakeholder approach at
the domestic, regional and international levels in
addressingthe challenges of cybercrime.

Ghana will identify opportunities, leverage on our
influence in West Africa and invest in cybersecurity
development in the sub-region especially through
the ECOWAS.

Inviewofthe current development ofcybersecurity
at the international level, Ghana will promote - as
part of its foreign policy - a free, open, innovative,

and secure cyberspace; and  stakeholder
engagement. Thisis based on the principle that the
behaviour of countries in cyberspace is governed
by international law.

Ghana will pursue and strengthen both formal
and informal cooperation mechanisms with
governments, international organisations and
private sector as part of its policy towards builing
a global consensus on responsible behaviour in
cyberspace.




6.0.5.2 Strategic Initiatives 8 Implementation Plan

The following constitutes the Strategic Initiatives € Implementation Plan that Ghana seeks to
implement towards achieving this Strategic Imperative. Timelines and responsibilities are presented
for the various initiatives and actions.

Table 6: Strengthen Cooperation - Strategic Initiatives and Implementation Plan.

S/N Strategic Description of Time Responsibility/

Initiative Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders

5.01  Cybersecurity Ghana will promote cybersecurity  Shortto + CSA
Foreign Policy development at the sub-regional,  Long-term + Ministry of Foreign
8: Initiatives regional and international levels Affairs £ Regional
through a focused foreign policy Integration
engagement underpinned by bilateral +. JCC
and multilateral engagements.Ghana + Otherrelevant
will pursue a free, open, innovative and international
secure cyberspace for all agenda as partners
part of our foreign policy. In this regard,
Ghana will participate in international
engagements that seek to further the
above goals. Ghana will promote these
ideals through active involvement of
governmental and non-governmental
engagement with the ECOWAS, Africa
Union, Commonwealth, United
Nations and Freedom Online Coalition
(FOC), among others. The Government
will support regional and continental
initiatives aimed at promoting human
rights and the rule of law in the
cyberspace.
5.02  Adoption and Ghana will adopt and implement  Shortto +. CSA
Implementation relevant regional and international Long-term . JCC
of International treaties on  cybercrime and + Ministry of Foreign
Treaties on cybersecurity. Implementation Affairs £ Regional
Cybercrime €: of the Convention on Cybercrime Integration
Cybersecurity (Budapest Convention) and the » Office ofthe

African Union Convention on Cyber
Security and Personal Data Protection
(Malabo Convention) as well as the

Attorney-General
and Ministry of

ÓN . Justice
ECOWAS  Directive on  Cybercrime + NSCS
are important components of this
A . + Non- Governmental
initiative. Ghana will also pursue other

. A a Stakeholders
relevant international cooperation Oth l o
agreements through the ECOWAS, os EraistEln
AU, Commonwealth and the United international

partners

Nations, among others.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



S/N

Strategic
Initiative

Description of
Strategic Initiative

Responsibility/
Stakeholders

5.03 Formal Develop a formal agreement with Shortto + CSA
Cooperation international partners to  foster Long-term . JCC
and strengthen cooperation on . Ministry of Foreign
cybersecurity. Ghana will implement Affairs 8 Regional
the necessary cooperation Integration
arrangements through existing + Otherrelevant
Mutual Legal Assistance provisions international
and establish a 24/7 point of contact partners
to provide immediate assistance for
Mutual Legal Assistance requests.
Bilateral engagements and
partnerships with other governments
and international institutions shall be
pursued under this initiative.
5.04 — Informal As part of  strengthening our  Shortto + CSA
Cooperation international relations, Ghana will Long-term . JCC
developinformalrelationswith relevant +  Otherrelevant
international bodies in addressing international
cybercrime. Ghana will strengthen partners
cooperation with institutions such as
AFRIPOL, EUROPOL and INTERPOL in
the fight against  cybercrime.
Ghana will work closely with the
international community and regional
partners to strengthen platforms
and procedures for cyber incident
reporting and response. Ghana will
Participate in international forums and
conferences on cybercrime including
internet governance forum and UN-led
discussions among others.
5.05 Domestic This initiative involves coordinated Short to + CSA
Cooperation engagements between government Medium-term + JCC
and key cybersecurity actors in + Non- Governmental
promoting Stakeholders

national cybersecurity development.
This involves the development
and operationalisation of the JCC
Charter. Regular engagements
between Government and Academia,
Businesses, Civil Society Organisations,
local representatives of international
bodies, professional associations

and industry will be pursued.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (51)



S/N Strategic Description of Time Responsibility/

Initiative Strategic Initiative Frame Stakeholders

5.06  Tech8.Cyber Ghana will pursue cooperation with Shortto +. CSA
Diplomacy multinational technology providers Long-term + Ministry of Foreign

and other relevant players in the Affairs €: Regional
technology space through Cyber Integration
Diplomacy. In view of this, Ghana will + JCC
support and contribute to international + Multinational Tech
discussions and  multi-stakeholder Firms (Facebook,
engagements involving tech giants Google, etc.)
aimed at promoting the responsible + Otherrelevant
use of the cyberspace, especially in anta
relation to the role of tech giants in partners

achieving Ghana's cybersecurity.

(52) National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



A LITA

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (52)



Implementation of the
National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy

The National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy which drives our cybersecurity agenda is
considered a significant determinant to the sustainable operations of the country's digitalisation
initiatives. Consistent with best practice approach to cybersecurity development, monitoring and
evaluation constitute a key factor for the effective implementation of cybersecurity initiatives.
This informs the Government's prioritisation and allocation of resources and investments in
crucial areas of development. Due to this, the government has prioritised the investment in
a digital solution with components and features capable of monitoring and evaluating the
implementation status of the strategic initiatives at each stage of our cybersecurity journey. Our
implementation plan for the next five years revolves around the five key strategic imperatives
which aim to BUILD a resilient digital ecosystem, SECURE the country's digital infrastructure,
DEVELOP national capacity, DETER the country from cybercrime and STRENGTHEN cybersecurity
cooperation at the domestic and international levels, all underpinned by the policy statements.
A digital solution will provide a progress report and gap analysis of work being done in our
cybersecurity arena with respect to the implementation of the National Cybersecurity Policy and
Strategy (NCPS).

Purpose

The digital solution to facilitate the implementation of the NCPS is being deployed as a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism to determine the progress status yearly over the five-
year implementation period of the specific initiatives of the Strategy. The solution is meant
to measure the rate, impact, successes and challenges associated with the implementation of
the Cybersecurity Strategy. The technology shall inform in the feasibility study of targets set to
achieve the strategic initiatives as well as provide gap analysis involved in the implementation
of the NCPS. It shall assess the impact of the implementation on the Ghanaian digital economy
based on the objectives set for each of the strategic imperatives, the successes achieved in the
implementation and the challenges to guide implementation of programmes and activities.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



EX) Monitoring and Evaluation

Our Monitoring 8 Evaluation (M8,E) Approach

To measure the rate, impact, successes and challenges associated with the implementation
of this strategy, the government will implement Monitoring and Evaluation (MéE). The ME
mechanisms to be implemented shall measure the rate of the realisation of the strategy based
on the timelines stated. It shall assess the impact of the implementation on the Ghanaian digital
economy based on the objectives set for each ofthe Strategic Imperatives, the successes achieved
in the implementation as well as the challenges to guide future implementation of programmes
and activities. Anumber of mechanisms shall be adopted as part of the MeE:

> Development of evidence-based M8:E metrics to measure the impact of the strategy
against its objectives.

> Deployment of a software solution (digital platform) to measure the rate of
implementation, both in the public and the private sector, taking into consideration
all sectoral programmes and initiatives.

> Collating and analysing cybercrime reports from CERT-GH and law enforcement
agencies to ascertain the frequency and magnitude of cybercrime trends in the
country.

> Conduct cybersecurity assessment on key institutions to establish their capabilities

in addressing cybersecurity issues.

> Implement a gap analysis framework to measure cybersecurity awareness of
personnel to determine areas of needed improvement.

> Conduct surveys to measure the impact, successes and challenges associated with
the implementation of specific strategic initiatives and programmes.

> Administer institutional capacity assessment questionnaire to assess the readiness
of the sectors in detecting, responding and addressing cybersecurity issues.

> Workshops and conference reports will be produced and analysed to determine the
strength of collaborations.

Success Indicators

The success in the implementation of this strategy is based on specific deliverables and
measurable results to the public, businesses, the government and the international community.
The following provide insights into the success indicators:

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (55)



Success Indicators - Build a Resilient Cyber Ecosystem

>

Evidence of cybersecurity incident reporting to CERT-GH and other Sectoral CERTs by
the public and businesses.

Improved capability for cybersecurity incident monitoring and prevention across all
sectors.

Improved response to cybersecurity incidents, demonstrated by the ability to quickly
restore digital services and systems after successful cyber-attacks.

Improved understanding of cybercrimes and cybersecurity incidents as well as the
ability to quantify losses arising from cybersecurity breaches.

Success Indicators - Secure our Digital Infrastructure

>

Strengthened digital infrastructure with high resilience to cyber-attacks, evidenced
partly by recorded failed attacks.

Reduced impact of cyber-attacks and duration required to recover from such attacks
against our Critical Information Infrastructure (Cll) and Government Digitalisation
Initiatives (GDIs)

Better understanding of threats targeting Cll and GDIs as well as the entire digital
ecosystem.

Increased trust in Ghana's digital ecosystem, evidenced partly by public confidence in
the use of digital services.

Success Indicators - Develop National Capacity

>

An improved and developed culture of cybersecurity, evidenced in knowledge
and awareness of cyber risks as well as, the actions to be taken regarding
cybersecurity, by Children, the Public, Businesses and Government.

Evidence of coordinated and integrated cybersecurity education across all levels
especially in the formal education sector.

Increase in investment in cybersecurity by the Ministries, Departments €: Agencies
(MDAs) and private sectors, including regular budget allocations for cybersecurity.

Evidence of adoption and enforcement of nationally-approved cybersecurity
standards, guidelines and best practices across all sectors.

Improved ability to measure the impact of cybercrimes and cybersecurity incidents,
including financial costs to the Ghanaian economy.

Evidence of the growth of the local cybersecurity ecosystem including development
of domestic workforce through partnerships between government and local firms,
academia and international partners.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Success Indicators -Deter Cybercrime

> Improvement in law enforcement capability to detect, investigate and prosecute
cybercrimes in a reasonable timeframe.

> A higher proportion of incidents being reported to authorities due to increased
public awareness, trust and cooperation with state institutions responsible for
cybercrime prevention and response.

> New skill set, tools and strategies to detect, monitor and disrupt activities of
cybercriminals especially by organized cybercrime networks.

> Effective legal framework, enforcement capabilities to investigate cybercrime cases
and an increase in the number of arrests and conviction of cybercriminals to serve as
deterrent to would-be offenders.

> Increase in the level of public trust in law enforcement and criminal justice authorities
in responding to cybercrimes.

Success Indicators - Strengthen Cooperation

> Improved and coordinated response to cybercrime and cybersecurity issues,
indicated by effective, structured engagements by members of the National Cyber
Security Technical Working Group.

> Improved cooperation with international partners to investigate and prosecute
cybercrime cases including joint investigation actions.

> Active involvement and contributions of Ghanaian public sector officials and private
sector subject matter experts in cybersecurity discussions at the international level.

> Improvement in the number of cybersecurity related engagements being championed
by Ghana, both in the public and private sectors, in the West African sub region.

> Ghanass ability to strengthen international consensus on legal regulations and
responsible behaviour in cyberspace by promoting the benefits of a free, open,
innovative and secure cyberspace; stakeholder engagement; and the principle
that state behaviour in cyberspace is governed by international law. Increase in
Ghanaian participation and organisation of international cybersecurity exercises,
trainings and capacity building programmes.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy (57)



9.0 Funding For National Cybersecurity

In accordance with Sections 29 to 34 of the Cybersecurity Act,2020 (Act 1038), the establishment
of a reliable domestic source of funding is imperative to provide guaranteed funding for
the country's cybersecurity development and to protect Ghana's investment in digital
transformation, consistent with international best practices. Sustained funding is required to
be able to implement the Act and the revised National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy. The
National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy identifies various initiatives and programmes of
activities that will require financial resources to implement. The Ministry of Communications and
Digitalisation in collaboration with relevant Ministries and Agencies will define the budget for
short term, medium-term and long term strategic national cybersecurity goals.

Ghana's economic prosperity is inherently linked to Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of
the country's Critical Information Infrastructure (CI!) and the entire national cyber ecosystem.
Consequently, the Government will create a sustainable national budget for cybersecurity. Thus,
a Cybersecurity Fund pursuant to the Act shall be established to support the implementation
of this policy and to facilitate cybersecurity research and innovation towards self-reliance in
pursuance of a Safer Digital Ghana.

[1] Conclusion: Cybersecurity Beyond 2027

The policy direction and the strategic initiatives outlined in this document are designed to
address the cybersecurity challenges in the next five years. While some of the policies and
initiatives are completely achievable within the timeframes allocated, given the allocation of the
right resources, the formulation and implementation of other policies and initiatives respectively
are likely to go beyond 2027. Consequently, the government will continue to monitor the
implementation of this policy and strategy, prioritise specific initiatives based on national needs
analysis to ensure prudent allocation of resources.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



qu) Acknowledgement

The development of this document will not have been possible without the commitment and
collaboration of a number of key stakeholders. Appreciation goes to the Sector Minister, Hon
Ursula Owusu-Ekuful, for her exceptional leadership in championing Ghana's cybersecurity
development. Our gratitude to Members of the Governing Board of the Cyber Security Authority
(CSA) which was established by H.E. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo for providing policy
direction to the country's cybersecurity development. Members of the Joint Cybersecurity
Committee (JCC), led by the Head ofthe Cyber Security Authority (CSA) Dr. Albert Antwi-Boasiako,
are duly acknowledged for their lead roles, collaborative efforts and contributions towards the
development of the policy and strategy.

The Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation also expresses its appreciation to Members
of the Parliamentary Select Committee on Communications for their valuable contributions
to the development of the document. The Ministry is also grateful to Ghana's cybersecurity
development partners including the ECOWAS Commission, the African Union Commission, the
World Bank, International Telecommunications Union, the Council of Europe, the European
Union, UNICEF, Freedom Online Coalition, the United States Government through the Security
Governance Initiative (SGI) and the Government of the United Kingdom for their support and
valuable contributions.

Ghana's domestic stakeholders continue to play critical roles in the development of national
interventions to mitigate cybercrime and cybersecurity. A number of non-governmental
stakeholders comprising representatives from industry, academia, professional associations and
civil society groups contributed to the review of the document. The Ministry is indebted to all
these institutions for their continuous commitment towards improving Ghana's cybersecurity
readiness.

The Ministry of Communications and Digitalisation expresses its appreciation to all the staff of
the National Cyber Security Centre for leading the development of this important production
towards a secure and resilient Digital Ghana. Finally, the Ministry is grateful to the Ghanaian
public — both at home and abroad for their keen interest and contributions towards the adoption
of a new National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy which seeks to guide our cybersecurity
development for the next five years.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Table 7: Table of Abbreviations and Description.

Abbreviation Description

AFRIPOL African Criminal Police Organisation

AU African Union

BoG Bank of Ghana

CERTs Computer Emergency Response Teams
[e]») Criminal Investigations Department
CMM Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model
cil Critical Information Infrastructure

cop Child Online Protection

CSA Cyber Security Authority

>] Defence Intelligence

DDoS Distributed Denial-of-Service

DoS Denial-of-Service

(10]:X0]L0]8 European Criminal Police Organisation
FOC Freedom Online Coalition

GCI Global Cybersecurity Index

GCScc Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre
GLACY+ Global Action on Cybercrime Extended
GSA Ghana Standards Authority

ICT Information Communication Technology
INTERPOL International Criminal Police Organisation
Information Technology

International Telecommunications Union
Joint Cybersecurity Committee
Ministries, Departments €: Agencies
Monitoring and Evaluation

National Accreditation Board

National Communications Authority
NCCE National Commission for Civic Education
NCIF National Cybersecurity Institutional Framework
NCSC National Cyber Security Centre

NCSIAC National Cyber Security Inter-Ministerial Advisory Council

National Cybersecurity P«




Abbreviation Description

NCPS National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy

NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations

NIB National Intelligence Bureau

NIS National Identification System

NITA National Information Technology Agency

NPAS National Property Addressing System

NES National Signals Bureau

NSCS National Security Council Secretariat

OCSEA Online Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse

PKI Public Key Infrastructure

RED Research and Development

SDGs Sustainable Development Goals

SOCs Security Operations Centres

SOPs Standard Operating Procedures

UN United Nations

UNCTAD United Nations Conference for Trade and Development
UNICEF United National International Children Emergency Fund
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs €, Crime

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Cyberattack > A deliberate attempt to damage, disrupt, or gain unauthorised access to a
computer, computer system or electronic communication network.

Cybercrime > Include both cyber-dependent and cyber-enabled crimes.

Cyber-dependent crimes > Crimes committed through the use of CT devices, and where the
devices are both the tool for committing the crime, and the target of the crime.

Cyber-enabled crimes > Traditional crimes which can be increased in scale or reach by the
use of computers, computer networks or other ICTs.

Cybersecurity > The state in which a computer or computer system is protected from
unauthorised access or attack for the purpose of ensuring that
a. the computer or computer system continues to be available and operational;
b. the integrity of the computer or computer system is maintained; and
c. the integrity and confidentiality of information stored in, processed by or
transmitted through the computer or computer system is maintained.

Cyberspace > The interdependent network of information technology infrastructure that
includes the internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, internet-connected
devices and embedded processors and controller.

Identity Theft > The deliberate use of someone else's identity, usually as a method to gain
access, financial advantage or gain other benefits in the other person's name.

Malware > Malware is any software intentionally designed to cause damage to a computer,
server, client, or computer network.

MDAs > Consists of Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



Safeguard > Areducing measure that acts to detect, prevent, or minimise loss associated
with the occurrence of a specific threat or category of threats.

Sectoral CERT 3 A Computer Emergency Response Team responsible for facilitating and
coordinating incident response procedures at the sectoral level.

Social Engineering > The psychological manipulation of people into performing actions or
divulging confidential information.

Vulnerability > Weakness in an information system, system security procedures, internal
controls, or implementation that could be exploited or triggered by a threat source.

National Cybersecurity Policy €: Strategy



REPUBLIC
OF GHANA




